<doc id="file28565807" filename="8826-0.txt" parent_folder="Literature" url="https://www.gutenberg.org/files/8826/8826-0.txt">
The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tales And Novels, Volume 1 (of 10), by Maria Edgeworth

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Tales And Novels, Volume 1 (of 10)
       Moral Tales

Author: Maria Edgeworth

Release Date: August 13, 2003 [eBook #8826]
[Most recently updated: February 6, 2021]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Anne Folland, Jonathan Ingram, Mary Meehan, David Widger
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS, VOLUME 1 (OF 10) ***




TALES AND NOVELS,

VOLUME I (of X)

MORAL TALES

By Maria Edgeworth



PREFACE.

It has been somewhere said by Johnson, that merely to invent a story is
no small effort of the human understanding. How much more difficult is
it to construct stories suited to the early years of youth, and, at
the same time, conformable to the complicate relations of modern
society--fictions, that shall display examples of virtue, without
initiating the young reader into the ways of vice--narratives, written
in a style level to his capacity, without tedious detail, or vulgar
idiom! The author, sensible of these difficulties, solicits indulgence
for such errors as have escaped her vigilance.

In a former work the author has endeavoured to add something to the
increasing stock of innocent amusement and early instruction, which
the laudable exertions of some excellent modern writers provide for the
rising generation; and, in the present, an attempt is made to provide
for young people, of a more advanced age, a few Tales, that shall
neither dissipate the attention, nor inflame the imagination.

In a work upon education, which the public has been pleased to notice,
we have endeavoured to show that, under proper management, amusement and
instruction may accompany each other through many paths of literature;
whilst, at the same time, we have disclaimed and reprehended all
attempts to teach in play. Steady, untired attention is what alone
produces excellence. Sir Isaac Newton, with as much truth as modesty,
attributed to this faculty those discoveries in science, which brought
the heavens within the grasp of man, and weighed the earth in a balance.
To inure the mind to athletic vigour is one of the chief objects of
good education; and we have found, as far as our limited experience has
extended, that short and active exertions, interspersed with frequent
agreeable relaxation, form the mind to strength and endurance, better
than long-continued feeble study.

Hippocrates, in describing the robust temperament, tells us that the
_athletae_ prepare themselves for the _gymnasium_ by strong exertion,
which they continued till they felt fatigue; they then reposed till they
felt returning strength and aptitude for labour: and thus, by alternate
exercise and indulgence, their limbs acquire the firmest tone of health
and vigour. We have found, that those who have tasted with the keenest
relish the beauties of Berquin, Day, or Barbauld, pursue a demonstration
of Euclid, or a logical deduction, with as much eagerness, and with more
rational curiosity, than is usually shown by students who are nourished
with the hardest fare, and chained to unceasing labour.

"Forester" is the picture of an eccentric character--a young man who
scorns the common forms and dependencies of civilized society; and
who, full of visionary schemes of benevolence and happiness, might, by
improper management, or unlucky circumstances, have become a fanatic and
a criminal.

The scene of "The Knapsack" is laid in Sweden, to produce variety; and
to show that the rich and poor, the young and old, in all countries, are
mutually serviceable to each other; and to portray some of those virtues
which are peculiarly amiable in the character of a soldier.

"Angelina" is a female Forester. The nonsense of _sentimentality_ is
here aimed at with the shafts of ridicule, instead of being combated
by serious argument. With the romantic eccentricities of Angelina are
contrasted faults of a more common and despicable sort. Miss Burrage is
the picture of a young lady who meanly flatters persons of rank; and
who, after she has smuggled herself into good company, is ashamed to
acknowledge her former friends, to whom she was bound by the strongest
ties of gratitude.

"Mademoiselle Panache" is a sketch of the necessary consequences of
imprudently trusting the happiness of a daughter to the care of those
who can teach nothing but accomplishments.

"The Prussian Vase" is a lesson against imprudence, and on exercise of
judgment, and an eulogium upon our inestimable trial by jury. This tale
is designed principally for young gentlemen who are intended for the
bar.

"The Good Governess" is a lesson to teach the art of giving lessons.

In "The Good Aunt," the advantages which a judicious early education
confers upon those who are intended for public seminaries are pointed
out. It is a common error to suppose that, let a boy be what he may,
when sent to Eton, Westminster, Harrow, or any great school, he will
be moulded into proper form by the fortuitous pressure of numbers; that
emulation will necessarily excite, example lead, and opposition polish
him. But these are vain hopes: the solid advantages which may be
attained in these large nurseries of youth must be, in a great measure,
secured by previous domestic instruction.

These Tales have been written to illustrate the opinions delivered in
"Practical Education." As their truth has appeared to me to be confirmed
by increasing experience, I sat down with pleasure to write this preface
for my daughter. It is hoped that the following stories will afford
agreeable relaxation from severer studies, and that they will be
thought--what they profess to be--_Moral_ Tales.

R.L. EDGEWORTH



CONTENTS

PREFACE.

FORESTER

THE PRUSSIAN VASE

THE GOOD AUNT



ANGELINA; OR, L'AMIE INCONNUE.

CHAPTER I.

CHAPTER II.

CHAPTER III.

CHAPTER IV.

CHAPTER V.



THE GOOD FRENCH GOVERNESS

MADEMOISELLE PANACHE.

THE KNAPSACK



FORESTER

Forester was the son of an English gentleman, who had paid some
attention to his education, but who had some singularities of opinion,
which probably influenced him in his conduct toward his children.

Young Forester was frank, brave, and generous, but he had been taught to
dislike politeness so much, that the common forms of society appeared to
him either odious or ridiculous; his sincerity was seldom restrained by
any attention to the feelings of others. His love of independence was
carried to such an extreme, that he was inclined to prefer the life
of Robinson Crusoe in his desert island, to that of any individual in
cultivated society. His attention had been early fixed upon the follies
and vices of the higher classes of people; and his contempt for selfish
indolence was so strongly associated with the name of gentleman, that
he was disposed to choose his friends and companions from amongst his
inferiors: the inequality between the rich and the poor shocked him; his
temper was enthusiastic as well as benevolent; and he ardently wished to
be a man, and to be at liberty to act for himself, that he might reform
society, or at least his own neighbourhood. When he was about nineteen
years old, his father died, and young Forester was sent to Edinburgh, to
Dr. Campbell, the gentleman whom his father had appointed his guardian.
In the choice of his mode of travelling his disposition appeared. The
stage-coach and a carrier set out nearly at the same time from Penrith.
Forester, proud of bringing his principles immediately into action, put
himself under the protection of the carrier, and congratulated himself
upon his freedom from prejudice. He arrived at Edinburgh in all the
glory of independence, and he desired the carrier to set him down at Dr.
Campbell's door.

"The doctor is not at home," said the footman, who opened the door.

"He _is_ at home," exclaimed Forester with indignation; "I see him at
the window."

"My master is just going to dinner, and can't see any body now," said
the footman; "but if you will call again at six o'clock, maybe he may
see you, my good lad."

"My name is Forester--let me in," said Forester, pushing-forwards.

"Forester!--Mr. Forester!" said the footman; "the young gentleman that
was expected in the coach to-day?" Without deigning to give the footman
any explanation, Forester took his own portmanteau from the carrier;
and Dr. Campbell came down-stairs just when the footman was officiously
struggling with the young gentleman for his burden. Dr. Campbell
received his pupil very kindly; but Forester would not be prevailed upon
to rub his shoes sufficiently upon the mat at the bottom of the stairs,
or to change his disordered dress before he made his appearance in the
drawing-room. He entered with dirty shoes, a threadbare coat, and hair
that looked as if it never had been combed; and he was much surprised
by the effect which his singular appearance produced upon the risible
muscles of some of the company.

"I have done nothing to be ashamed of," said he to himself; but,
notwithstanding all his efforts to be and to appear at ease, he was
constrained and abashed. A young laird, Mr. Archibald Mackenzie, seemed
to enjoy his confusion with malignant, half-suppressed merriment, in
which Dr. Campbell's son was too good-natured, and too well-bred, to
participate. Henry Campbell was three or four years older than Forester,
and _though_ he looked like a gentleman, Forester could not help being
pleased with the manner in which he drew him into conversation. The
secret magic of politeness relieved him insensibly from the torment of
false shame.

"It is a pity this lad was bred up a gentleman," said Forester to
himself, "for he seems to have some sense and goodness."

Dinner was announced, and Forester was provoked at being interrupted in
an argument concerning carts and coaches, which he had begun with Henry
Campbell. Not that Forester was averse to eating, for he was at this
instant ravenously hungry: but eating in company he always found equally
repugnant to his habits and his principles. A table covered with a clean
table-cloth; dishes in nice order; plates, knives, and forks, laid at
regular distances, appeared to our young Diogenes absurd superfluities,
and he was ready to exclaim, "How many things I do not want!" Sitting
down to dinner, eating, drinking, and behaving like other people,
appeared to him difficult and disagreeable ceremonies. He did not
perceive that custom had rendered all these things perfectly easy to
every one else in company; and as soon as he had devoured his food his
own way, he moralized in silence upon the good sense of Sancho Panza,
who preferred eating an egg behind the door to feasting in public; and
he recollected his favourite traveller Le Vaillant's{1} enthusiastic
account of his charming Hottentot dinners, and of the disgust that he
afterwards felt, on the comparison of European etiquette and African
_simplicity_.

{Footnote 1: Le Vaillant's Travels in Africa, vol. i. p. 114.}

"Thank God, the ceremony of dinner is over," said Forester to Henry
Campbell, as soon as they rose from table.

All these things, which seemed mere matter of course in society,
appeared to Forester strange ceremonies. In the evening there were cards
for those who liked cards, and there was conversation for those who
liked conversation. Forester liked neither; he preferred playing with a
cat; and he sat all night apart from the company in a corner of a sofa.
He took it for granted that the conversation could not be worth his
attention, because he heard Lady Catherine Mackenzie's voice amongst
others; he had conceived a dislike, or rather a contempt for this lady,
because she showed much of the pride of birth and rank in her manners.
Henry Campbell did not think it necessary to punish himself for her
ladyship's faults, by withdrawing from entertaining conversation; he
knew that his father had the art of managing the frivolous subjects
started in general company, so as to make them lead to amusement and
instruction; and this Forester would probably have discovered this
evening, had he not followed his own thoughts, instead of listening to
the observations of others. Lady Catherine, it is true, began with a
silly history of her hereditary antipathy for pickled cucumbers; and she
was rather tiresome in tracing the genealogy of this antipathy through
several generations of her ancestry; but Dr. Campbell said "that he had
heard, from an ingenious gentleman of her ladyship's family, that her
ladyship's grandfather, and several of his friends, nearly lost their
lives by pickled cucumbers;" and thence the doctor took occasion to
relate several curious circumstances concerning the effects of different
poisons.

Dr. Campbell, who plainly saw both the defects and the excellent
qualities of his young ward, hoped that, by playful raillery, and by
well-timed reasoning, he might mix a sufficient portion of good sense
with Forester's enthusiasm, might induce him gradually to sympathize in
the pleasures of cultivated society, and might convince him that virtue
is not confined to any particular class of men; that education, in the
enlarged sense of the word, creates the difference between individuals
more than riches or poverty. He foresaw that Forester would form a
friendship with his son, and that this attachment would cure him of his
prejudices against _gentlemen_, and would prevent him from indulging his
taste for vulgar company. Henry Campbell had more useful energy,
though less apparent enthusiasm, than his new companion: he was always
employed; he was really independent, because he had learned how to
support himself either by the labours of his head or of his hands; but
his independence did not render him unsociable; he was always ready
to sympathize with the pleasures of his friends, and therefore he was
beloved: following his father's example, he did all the good in his
power to those who were in distress; but he did not imagine that
he could reform every abuse in society, or that he could instantly
new-model the universe. Forester became, in a few days, fond of
conversing, or rather of holding long arguments, with Henry; but his
dislike to the young laird, Archibald Mackenzie, hourly increased.
Archibald and his mother, Lady Catherine Mackenzie, were relations
to Mrs. Campbell, and they were now upon a visit at her house. Lady
Catherine, a shrewd woman, fond of precedence, and fully sensible of the
importance that wealth can bestow, had sedulously inculcated into the
mind of her son all the maxims of worldly wisdom which she had collected
in her intercourse with society; she had inspired him with family pride,
but at the same time had taught him to pay obsequious court to his
superiors in rank or fortune: the art of rising in the world, she knew,
did not entirely depend upon virtue or ability; she was consequently
more solicitous about her son's manners than his morals, and was more
anxious that he should form high connexions, than that he should apply
to the severe studies of a profession. Archibald was nearly what might
be expected from his education, alternately supple to his superiors, and
insolent to his inferiors: to insinuate himself into the favour of young
men of rank and fortune, he affected to admire extravagance; but his
secret maxims of parsimony operated even in the midst of dissipation.
Meanness and pride usually go together. It is not to be supposed that
young Forester had such quick penetration, that he could discover the
whole of the artful Archibald's character in the course of a few days'
acquaintance; but he disliked him for good reasons, because he was a
laird, because he had laughed at his first entrée, and because he was
learning to dance.

THE SKELETON.

About a week after our hero's arrival at Dr. Campbell's, the doctor was
exhibiting some chemical experiments, with which Henry hoped that his
young friend would be entertained; but Forester had scarcely been five
minutes in the laboratory, before Mackenzie, who was lounging about the
room, sneeringly took notice of a large hole in his shoe. "It is
easily mended," said the independent youth; and he immediately left the
laboratory, and went to a cobbler's, who lived in a narrow lane, at the
back of Dr. Campbell's house. Forester had, from his bed-chamber window,
seen this cobbler at work early every morning; he admired his industry,
and longed to be acquainted with him. The good-humoured familiarity of
Forester's manner pleased the cobbler, who was likewise diverted by the
eagerness of _the young gentleman_ to mend his own shoe. After spending
some hours at the cobbler's stall, the shoe was actually mended, and
Forester thought that his morning's work was worthy of admiration. In
a court (or, as such places are called in Edinburgh, a close) near the
cobbler's, he saw some boys playing at ball: he joined them; and, whilst
they were playing, a dancing-master with his hair powdered, and who
seemed afraid of spattering his clean stockings, passed through the
court, and interrupted the ball players for a few seconds. The boys,
as soon as the man was out of hearing, declared that he passed through
_their_ court regularly twice a day, and that he always kicked their
marbles out of the ring. Without staying to weigh this evidence
scrupulously, Forester received it with avidity, and believed all that
had been asserted was true, because the accused was a dancing-master;
from his education he had conceived an antipathy to dancing-masters,
especially to such as wore silk stockings, and had their heads well
powdered. Easily fired at the idea of any injustice, and eager to
redress the grievances of _the poor,_ Forester immediately concerted
with these boys a scheme to deliver them from what he called the
insolence of the dancing-master, and promised that he would compel him
to go round by another street.

In his zeal for the liberty of his new companions, our hero did not
consider that he was infringing upon the liberties of a man who had
never done him any injury, and over whom he had no right to exercise any
control.

Upon his return to Dr. Campbell's, Forester heard the sound of a violin;
and he found that his enemy, M. Pasgrave, the dancing-master, was
attending Archibald Mackenzie: he learnt, that he was engaged to give
another lesson the next evening; and the plans of the confederates
in the ball-alley were arranged accordingly. In Dr. Campbell's room
Forester remembered to have seen a skeleton in a glass case; he seized
upon it, carried it down to his companions, and placed it in a niche in
the wall, on the landing-place of a flight of stone stairs down which
the dancing-master was obliged to go. A butcher's son (one of Forester's
new companions) he instructed to stand at a certain hour behind the
skeleton, with two rushlights, which he was to hold up to the eye-holes
in the skull.

The dancing-master's steps were heard approaching at the expected hour;
and the boys stood in ambush to enjoy the diversion of the sight. It was
a dark night; the fiery eyes of the skeleton glared suddenly upon the
dancing-master, who was so terrified at the spectacle, and in such haste
to escape, that his foot slipped, and he fell down the stone steps: his
ankle was sprained by the fall, and he was brought to Dr. Campbell's.
Forester was shocked at this tragical end of his intended comedy. The
poor man was laid upon a bed, and he writhed with pain. Forester, with
vehement expressions of concern, explained to Dr. Campbell the cause
of this accident, and he was much touched by the dancing-master's good
nature, who, between every twinge of pain, assured him that he should
soon be well, and endeavoured to avert Dr. Campbell's displeasure.
Forester sat beside the bed, reproaching himself bitterly; and he was
yet more sensible of his folly, when he heard, that the boys, whose
part he had hastily taken, had frequently amused themselves with playing
mischievous tricks upon this inoffensive man, who declared, that he had
never purposely kicked their marbles out of the ring, but had always
implored them to make way for him with all the civility in his power.

Forester resolved, that before he ever again attempted to do justice, he
would, at least, hear both sides of the question.

THE ALARM.

Forester would willingly have sat up all night with M. Pasgrave, to
foment his ankle from time to time, and, if possible, to assuage the
pain: but the man would not suffer him to sit up, and about twelve
o'clock he retired to rest. He had scarcely fallen asleep, when his
door opened, and Archibald Mackenzie roused him, by demanding, in
a peremptory tone, how he could sleep when the whole family were
frightened out of their wits by his pranks?

"Is the dancing-master worse? What's the matter?" exclaimed Forester in
great terror.

Archihald replied, that he was not talking or thinking about the
dancing-master, and desired Forester to make haste and dress himself,
and that he would then soon hear what was the matter.

Forester dressed himself as fast as he could, and followed Archibald
through a long passage, which led to a back staircase. "Do you hear the
noise?" said Archibald.

"Not I," said Forester.

"Well, you'll hear it plain enough presently," said Archibald: "follow
me down-stairs."

He followed, and was surprised, when he got into the hall, to find all
the family assembled. Lady Catherine had been awakened by a noise, which
she at first imagined to be the screaming of an infant. Her bedchamber
was on the ground floor, and adjoining to Dr. Campbell's laboratory,
from which the noise seemed to proceed. She awakened her son Archibald
and Mrs. Campbell; and, when she recovered her senses a little, she
listened to Dr. Campbell, who assured her, that what her ladyship
thought was the screaming of an infant was the noise of a cat: the
screams of this cat were terrible; and, when the light approached the
door of the laboratory, the animal flew at the door with so much fury,
that nobody could venture to open it. Every body looked at Forester, as
if they suspected that he had confined the cat, or that he was in some
way or other the cause of the disturbance. The cat, which, from his
having constantly fed and played with it, had grown extremely fond of
him, used to follow him often from room to room; and he now recollected,
that it followed him the preceding evening into the laboratory, when he
went to replace the skeleton. He had not observed whether it came out
of the room again, nor could he now conceive the cause of its yelling
in this horrible manner. The animal seemed to be mad with pain. Dr.
Campbell asked his son whether all the presses were locked. Henry said
he was sure they were all locked. It was his business to lock them every
evening; and he was so exact, that nobody doubted his accuracy.

Archibald Mackenzie, who all this time knew, or at least suspected the
truth, held himself in cunning silence. The preceding evening he, for
want of something to do, had strolled into the laboratory, and, with
the pure curiosity of idleness, peeped into the presses, and took the
stoppers out of several of the bottles. Dr. Campbell happened to come
in, and carelessly asked him if he had been looking in the presses; to
which question Archibald, though with scarcely any motive for telling a
falsehood, immediately replied in the negative. As the doctor turned his
head, Archibald put aside a bottle, which he had just before taken out
of the press; and, fearing that the noise of replacing the glass stopper
would betray him, he slipped it into his waistcoat pocket. How
much useless cunning! All this transaction was now fully present to
Archibald's memory: and he was well convinced that Henry had not seen
the bottle when he afterwards went to lock the presses; that the cat
had thrown it down; and that this was the cause of all the yelling that
disturbed the house. Archibald, however, kept his lips fast closed; he
had told one falsehood; he dreaded to have it discovered; and he hoped
the blame of the whole affair would rest upon Forester. At length the
animal flew with diminished fury at the door; its screams became feebler
and feebler, till, at last, they totally ceased. There was silence: Dr.
Campbell opened the door: the cat was seen stretched upon the ground,
apparently lifeless. As Forester looked nearer at the poor animal, he
saw a twitching motion in one of its hind legs; Dr. Campbell said, that
it was the convulsion of death. Forester was just going to lift up his
cat, when his friend Henry stopped his hand, telling him, that he would
burn himself, if he touched it. The hair and flesh of the cat on one
side were burnt away, quite to the bone. Henry pointed to the broken
bottle, which, he said, had contained vitriolic acid.

Henry in vain attempted to discover by whom the bottle of vitriolic acid
had been taken out of its place. Suspicion naturally fell upon Forester,
who, by his own account, was the last person in the room before
the presses had been locked for the night. Forester, in warm terms,
asserted, that he knew nothing of the matter. Dr. Campbell coolly
observed, that Forester ought not to be surprised at being suspected
upon this occasion; because every body had the greatest reason to
suspect the person, whom they had detected in one _practical joke,_ of
planning another.

"Joke!" said Forester, looking down upon his lifeless favourite; "do
you think me capable of such cruelty? Do you doubt my truth?" exclaimed
Forester, haughtily. "You are unjust. Turn me out of your house this
instant. I do not desire your protection, if I have forfeited your
esteem."

"Go to bed for to-night in my house," said Dr. Campbell; "moderate your
enthusiasm, and reflect coolly upon what has passed."

Dr. Campbell, as Forester indignantly withdrew, said, with a benevolent
smile, as he looked after him, "He wants nothing but a little common
sense. Henry, you must give him a little of yours."

In the morning, Forester first went to inquire how the dancing-master
had slept, and then knocked impatiently at Dr. Campbell's door.

"My father is not awake," said Henry; but Forester marched directly up
to the side of the bed, and, drawing back the curtain with no gentle
hand, cried, with a loud voice, "Dr. Campbell, I am come to beg your
pardon. I was angry when I said you were unjust."

"And I was asleep when you begged my pardon," said Dr. Campbell, rubbing
his eyes.

"The dancing-master's ankle is a great deal better; and I have buried
the poor cat," pursued Forester: "and I hope now, doctor, you'll at
least tell me, that you do not really suspect me of any hand in her
death."

"Pray let me go to sleep," said Dr. Campbell, "and _time_ your
explanations a little better."

THE GERANIUM.

The dancing-master gradually recovered from his sprain; and Forester
spent all his pocket-money in buying a new violin for him, as his had
been broken in his fall; his watch had likewise been broken against the
stone steps. Though Forester looked upon a watch as a useless bauble,
yet he determined to get this mended; and his friend Henry went with him
for this purpose to a watchmaker's.

Whilst Henry Campbell and Forester were consulting with the watchmaker
upon the internal state of the bruised watch, Archibald Mackenzie, who
followed them _for a lounge_, was looking over some new watches, and
ardently wished for the finest that he saw. As he was playing with this
fine watch, the watchmaker begged that he would take care not to break
it.

Archibald, in the insolent tone in which he was used to speak to a
_tradesman_, replied, that if he did break it, he hoped he was able to
pay for it. The watchmaker civilly answered, "he had no doubt of that,
but that the watch was not his property; it was Sir Philip Gosling's,
who would call for it, he expected, in a quarter of an hour."

At the name of Sir Philip Gosling, Archibald quickly changed his tone:
he had a great ambition to be of Sir Philip's acquaintance, for Sir
Philip was a young man who was to have a large fortune when he should
come of age, and who, in the meantime, spent as much of it as possible,
with great _spirit_ and little judgment. He had been sent to Edinburgh
for his education; and he spent his time in training horses, laying
bets, parading in the public walks, and ridiculing, or, in his own
phrase, _quizzing_ every sensible young man, who applied to literature
or science. Sir Philip, whenever he frequented any of the professor's
classes, took care to make it evident to every body present, that he did
not come there to learn, and that he looked down with contempt upon
all who were _obliged_ to study; he was the first always to make any
disturbance in the classes, or, in his elegant language, _to make a
row_.

This was the youth of whose acquaintance Archibald Mackenzie was
ambitious. He stayed in the shop, in hopes that Sir Philip would arrive:
he was not disappointed; Sir Philip came, and, with address which
Lady Catherine would perhaps have admired, Archibald entered into
conversation with the young baronet, if conversation that might be
called, which consisted of a species of fashionable dialect, devoid of
sense, and destitute of any pretence to wit. To Forester this dialect
was absolutely unintelligible: after he had listened to it with sober
contempt for a few minutes, he pulled Henry away, saying, "Come, don't
let us waste our time here; let us go to the brewery that you promised
to show me."

Henry did not immediately yield to the rough pull of his indignant
friend, for at this instant the door of a little back parlour behind
the watchmaker's shop opened slowly, and a girl of about seven years old
appeared, carrying, with difficulty, a flower-pot, in which there was
a fine large geranium in full flower. Henry, who saw that the child
was scarcely able to carry it, took it out of her hands, and asked her,
"Where she would like to have it put?"

"Here, for to-day!" said the little girl, sorrowfully; "but to-morrow it
goes away for ever."

The little girl was sorry to part with this geranium, because "she had
watched it all the winter," and said, "that she was very fond of it;
but that she was willing to part with it, though it was just come into
flower, because the apothecary had told her, that it was the cause of
her grandmother's having been taken ill. Her grandmother lodged," she
said, "in _that_ little room, and the room was very close, and she was
taken ill in the night--so ill, that she could hardly speak or stir; and
when the apothecary came, he said," continued the little girl, "it was
no wonder any body was ill, who slept in such a little close room, with
such a great geranium in it, _to poison the air_. So my geranium must
go!" concluded she with a sigh: "but, as it is for grandmother, I shall
never think of it again."

Henry Campbell and Forester were both struck with the modest simplicity
of this child's countenance and manner, and they were pleased with the
unaffected generosity with which she gave up her favourite geranium.
Forester noted this down in his mind as a fresh instance in favour of
his _exclusive_ good opinion of the poor. This little girl looked
poor, though she was decently dressed; she was so thin, that her little
cheek-bones could plainly be seen; her face had not the round, rosy
beauty of cheerful health: she was pale and sallow, and she looked in
patient misery. Moved with compassion, Forester regretted that he had no
money to give where it might have been so well bestowed. He was always
_extravagant_ in his generosity; he would often give five guineas where
five shillings would have been enough, and by these means he reduced
himself to the necessity sometimes of refusing assistance to deserving
objects. On his journey from his father's house to Edinburgh, he
lavished, in undistinguishing charity, a considerable sum of money; and
all that he had remaining of this money he spent in purchasing the new
violin for M. Pasgrave. Dr. Campbell absolutely refused to advance his
ward any money till his next quarterly allowance should become due.
Henry, who always perceived quickly what passed in the minds of others,
guessed at Forester's thoughts by his countenance, and forebore to
produce his own money, though he had it just ready in his hand: he knew
that he could call again at the watchmaker's, and give what he pleased,
without ostentation.

Upon questioning the little girl further, concerning her grandmother's
illness, Henry discovered, that the old woman had sat up late at night
knitting, and that, feeling herself extremely cold, she got a pan of
charcoal into her room; that, soon afterwards, she felt uncommonly
drowsy; and when her little grand-daughter spoke to her, and asked her
why she did not come to bed, she made no answer: a few minutes after
this, she dropped from her chair. The child was extremely frightened,
and though she felt it very difficult to rouse herself, she said,
she got up as fast as she could, opened the door, and called to the
watchmaker's wife, who luckily had been at work late, and was now raking
the kitchen fire. With her assistance the old woman was brought into the
air, and presently returned to her senses: the pan of charcoal had been
taken away before the apothecary came in the morning; as he was in a
great hurry when he called, he made but few inquiries, and consequently
condemned the geranium without sufficient evidence. As he left the
house, he carelessly said, "My wife would like that geranium, I think."
And the poor old woman, who had but a very small fee to offer, was eager
to give any thing that seemed to please the _doctor_.

Forester, when he heard this story, burst into a contemptuous
exclamation against the meanness of this and of all other apothecaries.
Henry informed the little girl, that the charcoal had been the cause of
her grandmother's illness, and advised them never, upon any account, to
keep a pan of charcoal again in her bedchamber; he told her, that many
people had been killed by this practice. "Then," cried the little girl,
joyfully, "if it was the charcoal, and not the geranium, that made
grandmother ill, I may keep my beautiful geranium:" and she ran
immediately to gather some of the flowers, which she offered to Henry
and to Forester. Forester, who was still absorbed in the contemplation
of the apothecary's meanness, took the flowers, without perceiving that
he took them, and pulled them to pieces as he went on thinking. Henry,
when the little girl held the geraniums up to him, observed, that the
back of her hand was bruised and black; he asked her how she had hurt
herself, and she replied innocently, "that she had not hurt _herself_,
but that her schoolmistress was a very _strict_ woman." Forester,
roused from his reverie, desired to hear what the little girl meant by a
_strict_ woman, and she explained herself more fully: she said, that,
as a favour, her grandmother had obtained leave from some great lady to
send her to a charity school: that she went there every day to learn
to read and work, but that the mistress of the charity school used her
scholars very severely, and often kept them for hours, after they had
done their own _tasks_, to spin for her; and that she beat them if they
did not spin as much as she expected. The little girl's grandmother then
said, that she knew all this, but that she did not dare to complain,
because the schoolmistress was under the patronage of some of "the
grandest ladies in Edinburgh," and that, as she could not afford to pay
for her little lass's schooling, she was forced to have her taught as
well as she could _for nothing_.

Forester, fired with indignation at this history of injustice, resolved,
at all events, to stand forth immediately in the child's defence; but,
without staying to consider how the wrong could be redressed, he thought
only of the quickest, or, as he said, the most manly means of doing the
business: he declared, that if the little girl would show him the way to
the school, he would go that instant and speak to the woman in the midst
of all her scholars. Henry in vain represented that this would not be a
prudent mode of proceeding.

Forester disdained prudence, and, trusting securely to the power of his
own eloquence, he set out with the child, who seemed rather afraid to
come to open war with her tyrant. Henry was obliged to return home to
his father, who had usually business for him to do about this time. The
little girl had stayed at home on account of her grandmother's illness,
but all the other scholars were hard at work, spinning in a close room,
when Forester arrived.

He marched directly into the schoolroom. The wheels stopped at once on
his appearance, and the schoolmistress, a raw-boned, intrepid-looking
woman eyed him with amazement: he broke silence in the following
words:--

"Vile woman, your injustice is come to light! How can you dare to
tyrannize over these poor children? Is it because they are poor? Take my
advice, children, resist this tyrant, put by your wheels, and spin for
her no more."

The children did not move, and the schoolmistress poured out a torrent
of abuse in broad Scotch, which, to the English ear of Forester,
was unintelligible. At length she made him comprehend her principal
questions--Who he was? and by whose authority he interfered between her
and her scholars? "By nobody's authority," was Forester's answer; "I
want no authority to speak in the cause of injured innocence." No sooner
had the woman heard these words, than she called to her husband, who was
writing in an adjoining room: without further ceremony, they both seized
upon our hero, and turned him out of the house.

The woman revenged herself without mercy upon the little girl whom
Forester had attempted to defend, and dismissed her, with advice never
more to complain of being obliged to spin for her mistress.

Mortified by the ill success of his enterprise, Forester returned home,
attributing the failure of his eloquence chiefly to his ignorance of the
Scotch dialect.

THE CANARY BIRD

At his return, Forester heard, that all Dr. Campbell's family were
going that evening to visit a gentleman who had an excellent cabinet of
minerals. He had some desire to see the fossils; but when he came to
the gentleman's house, he soon found himself disturbed at the praises
bestowed by some ladies in company upon a little canary bird, which
belonged to the mistress of the house. He began to kick his feet
together, to hang first one arm and then the other over the back of his
chair, with the obvious expression of impatience and contempt in
his countenance. Henry Campbell, in the meantime, said, without any
embarrassment, just what he thought about the bird. Archibald Mackenzie,
with artificial admiration, said a vast deal more than he thought, in
hopes of effectually recommending himself to the lady of the house.
The lady told him the history of three birds, which had successively
inhabited the cage before the present occupier. "They all died,"
continued she, "in a most _extraordinary_ manner, one after another, in
a short space of time, in convulsions."

"Don't listen," whispered Forester, pulling Henry away from the crowd
who surrounded the bird-cage; "how can you listen, like that polite
hypocrite, to this foolish woman's history of her _extraordinary_
favourites? Come down-stairs with me, I want to tell you my adventure
with the schoolmistress; we can take a turn in the hall, and come back
before the cabinet of minerals is opened, and before these women have
finished the ceremony of tea. Come."

"I'll come presently," said Henry; "I really want to hear this."

Henry Campbell was not listening to the history of the lady's favourite
birds like a polite hypocrite, but like a good-natured sensible person;
the circumstances recalled to his memory the conversation that we
formerly mentioned, which began about pickled cucumbers, and ended with
Dr. Campbell's giving an account of the effects of some poisons. In
consequence of this conversation, Henry's attention had been turned to
the subject, and he had read several essays, which had informed him of
many curious facts. He recollected, in particular, to have met with
the account{2} of a bird that had been poisoned, and whose case bore a
strong resemblance to the present. He begged leave to examine the cage,
in order to discover whether there were any lead about it, with which
the birds could have poisoned themselves. No lead was to be found: he
next examined whether there were any white or green paint about it;
he inquired whence the water came which the birds had drunk; and he
examined the trough which held their seeds. The lady, whilst he was
pursuing these inquiries, said she was sure that the birds could not
have died either for want of air or exercise, for that she often left
the cage open on purpose, that they might fly about the room. Henry
immediately looked round the room, and at length he observed in an
inkstand, which stood upon a writing table, a number of wafers, which
were many of them chipped round the edges; upon sweeping out the
bird-cage, he found a few very small bits of wafer mixed with the seeds
and dust; he was now persuaded that the birds had eaten the wafers, and
that they had been poisoned by the red lead which they contained; he
was confirmed in this opinion, by being told, that the wafers had lately
been missed very frequently, and it had been imagined that they had been
used by the servants. Henry begged the lady would try an experiment,
which might probably save the life of her new favourite; the lady,
though she had never before tried an experiment, was easily prevailed
upon. She promised Henry that she would lock up the wafers; and he
prophesied that her bird would not, like his predecessors, come to an
untimely end. Archibald Mackenzie was vexed to observe, that knowledge
had in this instance _succeeded_ better, even with a lady, than
flattery. As for Forester, he would certainly have admired his friend
Henry's ingenuity, if he had been attending to what had passed; but he
had taken a book, and had seated himself in an arm-chair, which had been
placed on purpose for an old gentleman in company, and was deep in the
history of a man who had been cast away, some hundred years ago, upon a
desert island.

{Footnote 2: Falconer, on the Poison of Lead and Copper.}

He condescended, however, to put down his book when the fossils were
produced: and, as if he had just awakened from a dream, rubbed his eyes,
stretched himself, and joined the rest of the company. The malicious
Archibald, who observed that Forester had seated himself, through
absence of mind, in a place which prevented some of the ladies from
seeing the fossils, instantly made a parade of his own politeness,
to contrast himself advantageously with the rude negligence of his
companion; but Archibald's politeness was always particularly directed
to the persons in company whom he thought of the most importance. "You
can't see there," said Forester, suddenly rousing himself, and observing
that Dr. Campbell's daughter, Miss Flora Campbell, was standing behind
him; "had you not better sit down in this chair? I don't want it,
because I can see over your head; sit down." Archibald smiled at
Forester's simplicity, in paying his awkward compliment to the
young lady, who had, according to his mode of estimating, the least
pretensions to notice of any one present. Flora Campbell was neither
rich nor beautiful, but she had a happy mixture in her manners of
Scottish sprightliness and English reserve. She had an eager desire to
improve herself, whilst a nice sense of propriety taught her never to
intrude upon general notice, or to recede from conversation with airs
of counterfeit humility. Forester admired her abilities, because he
imagined that he was the only person who had ever discovered them; as
to her manners, he never observed these, but even whilst he ridiculed
politeness he was anxious to find out what she thought polite. After
he had told her all that he knew concerning the fossils, as they were
produced from the cabinet--and he was far from ignorant--he at length
perceived that she knew full as much of natural history as he did, and
he was surprised that a young lady should know so much, and should not
be conceited. Flora, however, soon sunk many degrees in his opinion;
for, after the cabinet of mineralogy was shut, some of the company
talked of a ball, which was to be given in a few days, and Flora, with
innocent gaiety, said to Forester, "Have you learnt to dance a Scotch
reel since you came to Scotland?" "_I!_" cried Forester with contempt;
"do you think it the height of human perfection to dance a Scotch
reel?--then that fine young laird, Mr. Archibald Mackenzie, will suit
you much better than I shall." And Forester returned to his arm-chair
and his desert island.

THE KEY.

It was unfortunate that Forester retired from company in such abrupt
displeasure at Flora Campbell's question, for had he borne the idea of
a Scotch reel more like a philosopher, he would have heard of something
interesting relative to the intended ball, if any thing relative to a
ball could be interesting to him. It was a charity-ball, for the benefit
of the mistress of the very charity-school{3} to which the little girl
with the bruised hand belonged. "Do you know," said Henry to Forester,
when they returned home, "that I have great hopes we shall be able
to get justice done to the poor children? I hope the tyrannical
schoolmistress may yet be punished. The lady, with whom we drank tea
yesterday is one of the patronesses of the charity-school."

{Footnote 3: There is no charity-school of this description in
Edinburgh; this cannot, therefore, be mistaken for private satire.}

"Lady patronesses!" cried Forester; "we need not expect justice from a
lady patroness, depend upon it, especially at a ball; her head will be
full of feathers, or some such things. I prophesy you will not succeed
better than I have."

The desponding prophecies of Forester did not deter Henry from pursuing
a scheme which he had formed. The lady, who was the mistress of the
canary bird, came in a few days to visit his mother, and she told him
that his experiment had succeeded, that she had regularly locked up the
wafers, and that her favourite bird was in perfect health. "And what
fee, doctor," said she, smiling, "shall I give you for saving his life?"

"I will tell you in a few minutes," replied Henry; and in a few minutes
the little girl and her geranium were sent for, and appeared. Henry told
the lady all the circumstances of her story with so much feeling, and at
the same time with so much propriety, that she became interested in
the cause: she declared that she would do every thing in her power
to prevail upon the other ladies to examine into the conduct of the
schoolmistress, and to have her dismissed immediately, if it should
appear that she had behaved improperly.

Forester, who was present at this declaration, was much astonished, that
a lady, whom he had seen caressing a canary-bird, could speak with
so much decision and good sense. Henry obtained his fee: he asked
and received permission to place the geranium in the middle of the
supper-table at the ball; and he begged that the lady would take an
opportunity, at supper, to mention the circumstances which he had
related to her; but this she declined, and politely said, that she was
sure Henry would tell the story much better than she could.

"Come out and walk with me," said Forester to Henry, as soon as the lady
was gone. Henry frequently left his occupations with great good-nature,
to accompany our hero in his rambles, and he usually followed the
subjects of conversation which Forester started. He saw, by the gravity
of his countenance, that he had something of importance revolving in his
mind. After he had proceeded in silence for some time along the walk,
under the high rock called Arthur's Seat, he suddenly stopped, and,
turning to Henry, exclaimed, "I esteem you; do not make me despise you!"

"I hope I never shall," said Henry, a little surprised by his friend's
manner; "what is the matter?"

"Leave balls, and lady patronesses, and petty artifices, and supple
address, to such people as Archibald Mackenzie," pursued Forester, with
enthusiasm:

     "Who noble ends by noble means pursues--"
     "Will scorn canary birds, and _cobble shoes_,"

replied Henry, laughing; "I see no meanness in my conduct: I do not know
what it is you disapprove."

"I do not approve," said Forester, "of your having recourse to _mean
address_ to obtain justice."

Henry requested to know what his severe friend meant by _address_; but
this was not easily explained. Forester, in his definition of _mean
address_, included all that attention to the feelings of others, all
those honest arts of pleasing, which make society agreeable. Henry
endeavoured to convince him, that it was possible for a person to wish
to please, nay, even to succeed in that wish, without being insincere.
Their argument and their walk continued, till Henry, who, though very
active, was not quite so robust as his friend, was completely tired,
especially as he perceived that Forester's opinions remained unshaken.

"How effeminate you _gentlemen_ are!" cried Forester: "see what it is to
be brought up in the lap of luxury. Why, I am not at all tired; I could
walk a dozen miles further, without being in the least fatigued!"

Henry thought it a very good thing to be able to walk a number of
miles without being fatigued, but he did not consider it as the highest
perfection of human nature. In his friend's present mood, nothing less
could content him, and Forester went on to demonstrate to the weary
Henry, that all fortitude, all courage, and all the manly virtues, were
inseparably connected with _pedestrian indefatigability_. Henry, with
good-natured presence of mind, which perhaps his friend would have
called _mean address_, diverted our hero's rising indignation by
proposing that they should both go and look at the large brewery which
was in their way home, and with which Forester would, he thought, be
entertained.

The brewery fortunately turned the course of Forester's thoughts, and,
instead of quarrelling with his friend for being tired, he condescended
to postpone all further debate. Forester had, from his childhood, a
habit of twirling a key, whenever he was thinking intently: the key had
been produced, and had been twirling upon its accustomed thumb during
the argument upon address; and it was still in Forester's hand when they
went into the brewery. As he looked and listened, the key was essential
to his power of attending; at length, as he stopped to view a large
brewing vat, the key unluckily slipped from his thumb, and fell to the
bottom of the vat: it was so deep, that the tinkling sound of the key,
as it touched the bottom, was scarcely heard. A young man who belonged
to the brewery immediately descended by a ladder into the vat, to get
the key, but scarcely had he reached the bottom, when he fell down
senseless. Henry Campbell was speaking to one of the clerks of the
brewery when this accident happened: a man came running to them with the
news, "The vat has not been cleaned; it's full of bad air." "Draw him
up, let down a hook and cords for him instantly, or he's a dead man,"
cried Henry, and he instantly ran to the place. What was his terror,
when he beheld Forester descending the ladder! He called to him to stop;
he assured him that the man could be saved without his hazarding his
life: but Forester persisted; he had one end of a cord in his hand,
which he said he could fasten in an instant round the man's body. There
was a skylight nearly over the vat, so that the light fell directly upon
the bottom.

Henry saw his friend reach the last step of the ladder. As Forester
stooped to put the rope round the shoulders of the man, who lay
insensible at the bottom of the vat, a sudden air of idiocy came over
his animated countenance; his limbs seemed no longer to obey his will;
his arms dropped, and he fell insensible.

The spectators, who were looking down from above, were so much
terrified, that they could not decide to do any thing; some cried,
"It's all over with him! Why would he go down?" Others ran to procure
a hook--others called to him to take up the rope again, if he possibly
could: but Forester could not hear or understand them, Henry Campbell
was the only person who, in this scene of danger and confusion, had
sufficient presence of mind to be of service.

Near the large vat, into which Forester had descended, there was a
cistern of cold water. Henry seized a bucket, which was floating in
the cistern, filled it with water, and emptied the water into the vat,
dashing it against the sides, to disperse the water, and to displace
the mephitic air{4}, He called to the people, who surrounded him,
for assistance; the water expelled the air; and, when it was safe to
descend, Henry instantly went down the ladder himself, and fastened the
cord round Forester, who was quite helpless.

{Footnote 4: Carbonic acid gas.}

"Draw him up!" said Henry, They drew him up. Henry fastened another cord
round the body of the other man, who lay at the bottom of the vessel,
and he was taken up in the same manner. Forester soon returned to his
senses, when he was carried into the air; it was with more difficulty
that the other man, whose animation had been longer suspended, was
recovered; at length, however, by proper application, his lungs played
freely, he stretched himself, looked round upon the people who were
about him with an air of astonishment, and was some time before he
could recollect what had happened to him. Forester, as soon as he had
recovered the use of his understanding, was in extreme anxiety to know
whether the poor man, who went down for his key, had been saved. His
gratitude to Henry, when he heard all that had passed, was expressed in
the most enthusiastic manner.

"I acted like a madman, and you like a man of sense," said Forester.
"You always know how to do good: I do mischief, whenever I attempt to
do good. But now, don't expect, Henry, that I should give up any of my
opinions to you, because you have saved my life. I shall always argue
with you just as I did before. Remember, I despise _address_, I don't
yield a single point to you. Gratitude shall never make me a sycophant."

THE FLOWERPOT.

Eager to prove that he was not a sycophant, Forester, when he returned
home with his friend Henry, took every possible occasion to contradict
him, with even more than his customary rigidity; nay, he went further
still, to vindicate his sincerity.

Flora Campbell had never entirely recovered our hero's esteem, since she
had unwittingly expressed her love for Scotch reels; but she was happily
unconscious of the crime she had committed, and was wholly intent upon
pleasing her father and mother, her brother Henry, and herself. She had
a constant flow of good spirits, and the charming domestic talent of
making every trifle a source of amusement to herself and others: she
was sprightly, without being frivolous; and the uniform sweetness of
her temper showed, that she was not in the least in want of flattery, or
dissipation, to support her gaiety. But Forester, as the friend of her
brother, thought it incumbent upon him to discover faults in her which
no one else could discover, and to assist in her education, though she
was only one year younger than himself. She had amused herself, the
morning that Forester and her brother were at the brewery, with painting
a pasteboard covering for the flower-pot which held the poor little
girl's geranium. Flora had heard from her brother of his intention
to place it in the middle of the supper-table, at the ball; and she
flattered herself, that he would like to see it ornamented by her hands
at his return. She produced it after dinner. Henry thanked her, and
her father and mother were pleased to see her eagerness to oblige her
brother. The cynical Forester alone refused his sympathy. He looked at
the flower-pot with marked disdain. Archibald, who delighted to contrast
himself with the unpolished Forester, and who remarked that Flora and
her brother were both somewhat surprised at his unsociable silence,
slyly said, "There's something in this flower-pot Miss Campbell, which
does not suit Mr. Forester's correct taste; I wish he would allow us to
profit by his criticisms."

Forester vouchsafed not a reply.

"Don't you like it, Forester?" said Henry.

"No, he does not like it," said Flora, smiling; "don't force him to say
that he does."

"Force me to say I like what I don't like!" repeated Forester; "no, I
defy any body to do that."

"But why," said Dr. Campbell, laughing, "why such a waste of energy
and magnanimity about a trifle? If you were upon your trial for life or
death, Mr. Forester, you could not look more resolutely guarded--more as
if you had 'worked up each corporal agent' to the terrible feat!"

"Sir," said Forester, who bore the laugh that was raised against him
with the air of a martyr, "I can bear even your ridicule in the cause
of truth." The laugh continued at the solemnity with which he pronounced
these words. "I think," pursued Forester, "that those who do not respect
truth in trifles, will never respect it in matters of consequence."

Archibald Mackenzie laughed more loudly, and with affectation, at this
speech: Henry and Dr. Campbell's laughter instantly ceased.

"Do not mistake us," said Dr. Campbell; "we did not laugh at your
principles, we only laughed at your manner."

"And are not principles of rather more consequence than manners?"

"Of infinitely more consequence," said Dr. Campbell: "but why, to
excellent principles, may we not add agreeable manners? Why should not
truth be amiable, as well as respectable? You, who have such enlarged
views for the good of the whole human race, are, I make no doubt,
desirous that your fellow-creatures should love truth, as well as you
love it yourself."

"Certainly, I wish they did," said Forester.

"And have your observations upon the feelings of others, and upon your
own, led you to conclude, that we are most apt to like those things
which always give us pain? And do you, upon this principle, wish to make
truth as painful as possible, in order to increase our love for it?"

"I don't wish to make truth painful," said Forester; "but, at the same
time, it is not my fault if people can't bear pain. I think people who
can't bear pain, both of body and mind, cannot be good for any thing;
for, in the first place, they will always," said Forester, glancing his
eye at Flora and her flower-pot,--"they will always prefer flattery to
truth, as all weak people do."

At this sarcastic reflection, which seemed to be aimed at the sex, Lady
Catherine, Mrs. Campbell, and all the ladies present, except Flora,
began to speak at once in their own vindication.

As soon as there was any prospect of peace, Dr. Campbell resumed his
argument in the calmest voice imaginable.

"But, Mr. Forester, without troubling ourselves for the present with
the affairs of the ladies, or of weak people, may I ask what degree
of unnecessary pain you think it the duty of a strong person, a moral
Samson, to bear?"

"Unnecessary pain! I do not think it is any body's duty to bear
_unnecessary_ pain."

"Nor to make others bear it?"

"Nor to make others bear it."

"Then we need argue no further. I congratulate you, Mr. Forester, upon
your becoming so soon a proselyte to politeness."

"To politeness!" said Forester, starting back.

"Yes, my good sir; real politeness only teaches us to save others
from _unnecessary pain_; and _this_ you have just allowed to be your
wish.--And now for the grand affair of Flora's flower-pot. You are not
bound by politeness to tell any falsehoods; weak as she is, and a woman,
I hope she can bear to hear the painful truth upon such an important
occasion."

"Why," said Forester, who at last suffered his features to relax into a
smile, "the truth then is, that I don't know whether the flower-pot be
pretty or ugly, but I was determined not to say it was pretty."

"But why," said Henry, "did you look so heroically severe about the
matter?"

"The reason I looked grave," said Forester, "was, because I was afraid
your sister Flora would be spoiled by all the foolish compliments that
were paid to her and her flower-pot."

"You are very considerate; and Flora, I am sure, is much obliged to
you," said Dr. Campbell, smiling, "for being so clear-sighted to the
dangers of female vanity. You would not then, with a safe conscience,
trust the completion of her education to her mother, or to myself?"

"I am sure, sir," said Forester, who now, for the first time, seemed
sensible that he had not spoken with perfect propriety, "I would not
interfere impertinently for the world. You are the best judges; only I
thought parents were apt to be partial. Henry has saved my life, and I
am interested for every thing that belongs to him. So I hope, if I
said any thing rude, you will attribute it to a good motive. I wish the
flower-pot had never made its appearance, for it has made me appear very
impertinent."

Flora laughed with so much good humour at this odd method of expressing
his contrition, that even Forester acknowledged the influence of
engaging manners and sweetness of temper. He lifted up the flower-pot,
so as completely to screen his face, and, whilst he appeared to be
examining it, he said, in a low voice, to Henry, "She is above the
foibles of her sex."

"Oh, Mr. Forester, take care!" cried Flora.

"Of what?" said Forester, starting.

"It is too late now," said Flora.

And it was too late. Forester, in his awkward manner of lifting the
flower-pot and its painted case, had put his thumbs into the mould, with
which the flower-pot had been newly filled. It was quite soft and wet.
Flora, when she called to him, saw the two black thumbs just ready to
stamp themselves upon her work, and her warning only accelerated its
fate; for, the instant she spoke, the thumbs closed upon the painted
covering, and Forester was the last to perceive the mischief that he had
done.

There was no possibility of effacing the stains, nor was there time
to repair the damage, for the ball was to commence in a few hours, and
Flora was obliged to send her disfigured work, without having had the
satisfaction of hearing the ejaculation which Forester pronounced in her
praise behind the flower-pot.

THE BALL.

Henry seized the moment when Forester was softened by the mixed effect
of Dr. Campbell's raillery and Flora's good humour, to persuade him,
that it would be perfectly consistent with sound philosophy to dress
himself for a ball, nay, even to dance a country-dance. The word _reel_,
to which Forester had taken a dislike, Henry prudently forbore to
mention; and Flora, observing, and artfully imitating her brother's
prudence, substituted the word _hays_ instead of _reels_ in her
conversation. When all the party were ready to go to the ball, and the
carriages at the door, Forester was in Dr. Campbell's study, reading the
natural history of the elephant.

"Come," said Henry, who had been searching for him all over the house,
"we are waiting for you; I'm glad to see you dressed--come!"

"I wish you would leave me behind," said Forester, who seemed to have
relapsed into his former unsociable humour, from having been left
half an hour in his beloved solitude; nor would Henry probably have
prevailed, if he had not pointed to the print of the elephant{5}. "That
mighty animal, you see, is so docile, that he lets himself be guided by
a young boy," said Henry; "and so must you."

{Footnote 5: Cabinet of Quadrupeds.}

As he spoke he pulled Forester gently, who thought he could not
show less docility than his favourite animal. When they entered the
ball-room, Archibald Mackenzie asked Flora to dance, whilst Forester was
considering where he should put his hat. "Are you going to dance without
me? I thought I had asked you to dance with me. I intended it all the
time we were coming in the coach."

Flora thanked him for his kind intentions; whilst Archibald, with a look
of triumph, hurried his partner away, and the dance began. Forester saw
this transaction in the most serious light, and it afforded him subject
for meditation till at least half a dozen country-dances had been
finished. In vain the Berwick Jockey, the Highland Laddie, and the
Flowers of Edinburgh, were played; "they suited not the gloomy habit" of
his soul. He fixed himself behind a pillar, proof against music, mirth,
and sympathy: he looked upon the dancers with a cynical eye. At length
he found an amusement that gratified his present splenetic humour; he
applied both his hands to his ears, effectually to stop out the sound of
the music, that he might enjoy the ridiculous spectacle of a number of
people capering about, without any apparent motive. Forester's attitude
caught the attention of some of the company; indeed, it was strikingly
awkward. His elbows stuck out from his ears, and his head was sunk
beneath his shoulders. Archibald Mackenzie was delighted beyond measure
at his figure, and pointed him out to his acquaintance with all possible
expedition. The laugh and the whisper circulated with rapidity. Henry,
who was dancing, did not perceive what was going on till his partner
said to him, "Pray, who is that strange mortal?"

"My friend," cried Henry: "will you excuse me for one instant?" And he
ran up to Forester, and roused him from his singular attitude. "He is,"
continued Henry, as he returned to his partner, "an excellent young
man, and he has superior abilities; we must not quarrel with him for
trifles."

With what different eyes different people behold the same objects!
Whilst Forester had been stopping his ears, Dr. Campbell, who had more
of the nature of the laughing than of the weeping philosopher, had found
much benevolent pleasure in contemplating the festive scene. Not that
any folly or ridicule escaped his keen penetration; but he saw every
thing with an indulgent eye, and, if he laughed, laughed in such a
manner, that even those who were the objects of his pleasantry could
scarcely have forborne to sympathize in his mirth. Folly, he thought,
could be as effectually corrected by the tickling of a feather, as by
the lash of the satirist. When Lady Margaret M'Gregor, and Lady Mary
Macintosh, for instance, had almost forced their unhappy partners into a
quarrel to support their respective claims to precedency, Dr. Campbell,
who was appealed to as the relation of both the furious fair ones,
decided the difference expeditiously, and much to the amusement of the
company, by observing, that, as the pretensions of each of the ladies
were incontrovertible, and precisely balanced, there was but one
possible method of adjusting their precedency--by their age. He was
convinced, he said, that the youngest lady would with pleasure yield
precedency to the elder. The contest was now, which should stand the
lowest, instead of which should stand the highest, in the dance: and
when the proofs of seniority could not be settled, the fair ones drew
lots for their places, and submitted that to chance which could not be
determined by prudence.

Forester stood beside Dr. Campbell whilst all this passed, and wasted
a considerable portion of virtuous indignation upon the occasion. "And
look at that absurd creature!" exclaimed Forester, pointing out to Dr.
Campbell a girl who was footing and pounding for fame at a prodigious
rate. Dr. Campbell turned from the pounding lady to observe his own
daughter Flora, and a smile of delight came over his countenance:
for "_parents are apt to be partial_"--especially those who have such
daughters as Flora. Her light figure and graceful agility attracted the
attention even of many impartial spectators; but she was not intent upon
admiration: she seemed to be dancing in the gaiety of her heart; and
that was a species of gaiety in which every one sympathized, because it
was natural, and of which every one approved, because it was innocent.
There was a certain delicacy mixed with her sportive humour, which
seemed to govern, without restraining, the tide of her spirits. Her
father's eye was following her as she danced to a lively Scotch tune,
when Forester pulled Dr. Campbell's cane, on which he was leaning,
and exclaimed, "Doctor, I've just thought of an excellent plan for a
tragedy!"

"A tragedy!" repeated Dr. Campbell, with unfeigned surprise; "are you
sure you don't mean a comedy?"

Forester persisted that he meant a tragedy, and was proceeding to open
the plot. "Don't force me to your tragedy now," said Dr. Campbell, "or
it will infallibly be condemned. I cannot say that I have my _buskin_
on! and I advise you to take yours off. Look, is that the tragic muse?"

Forester was astonished to find, that so great a man as Dr. Campbell
had so little the power of abstraction; and he retired to muse upon the
opening of his tragedy in a recess under the music gallery. But here he
was not suffered long to remain undisturbed; for, near this spot, Sir
Philip Gosling presently stationed himself; Archibald Mackenzie, who
left off dancing as soon as Sir Philip entered the room, came to the
half-intoxicated baronet; and they, with some other young men, worthy
of their acquaintance, began so loud a contest concerning the number
of bottles of claret which a man might, could, or should drink at a
sitting, that even Forester's powers of abstraction failed, and his
tragic muse took her flight.

"Supper! Supper! thank God!" exclaimed Sir Philip, as supper was now
announced. "I'd never set my foot in a ballroom," added he, with several
suitable oaths, "if it were not for the supper."

"Is that a rational being?" cried Forester to Dr. Campbell, after Sir
Philip had passed them.

"Speak a little lower," said Dr. Campbell, "or he will infallibly prove
his title to rationality by shooting you, or by making you shoot him,
through the head."

"But, sir," said Forester, holding Dr. Campbell fast, whilst all the
rest of the company were going down to supper, "how can you bear such a
number of foolish, disagreeable people with patience?"

"What would you have me do?" said Dr. Campbell. "Would you have me get
up and preach in the middle of a ball-room? Is it not as well, since we
are here, to amuse ourselves with whatever can afford us any amusement,
and to keep in good humour with all the world, especially with
ourselves?--and had we not better follow the crowd to supper?"

Forester went down-stairs; but, as he crossed an antechamber, which
led to the supper-room, he exclaimed, "If I were a legislator, I would
prohibit balls."

"And if you were a legislator," said Dr. Campbell, pointing to a
tea-kettle, which was on the fire in the antechamber, and from the spout
of which a grey cloud of vapour issued--"if you were a legislator, would
not you have stoppers wedged tight into the spouts of all tea-kettles in
your dominions?"

"No, sir," said Forester; "they would burst."

"And do you think that folly would not burst, and do more mischief than
a tea-kettle in the explosion, if you confined it so tight?"

Forester would willingly have stayed in the antechamber, to begin a
critical dissection of this allusion; but Dr. Campbell carried him
forwards into the supper-room. Flora had kept a seat for her father; and
Henry met them at the door.

"I was just coming to see for you, sir," said he to his father. "Flora
began to think you were lost."

"No," said Dr. Campbell, "I was only detained by a would-be Cato, who
wanted me to quarrel with the whole world, instead of eating my supper.
What would you advise me to eat, Flora?" said he, seating himself beside
her.

"Some of this trifle, papa;" and as she lightly removed the flowers with
which it was ornamented, her father said, "Yes, give me some trifle,
Flora. Some characters are like that trifle--flowers and light froth at
the top, and solid, good sweetmeat, beneath."

Forester immediately stretched out his plate for some trifle. "But I
don't see any use in the flowers, sir," said he.

"Nor any beauty," said Dr. Campbell.

Forester picked the _troublesome_ flowers out of his trifle, and ate a
quantity of it sufficient for a Stoic. Towards the end of the supper, he
took some notice of Henry, who had made several ineffectual efforts to
amuse him by such slight strokes of wit as seemed to suit the time and
place. Time and place were never taken into Forester's consideration: he
was secretly displeased with his friend Henry for having danced all the
evening instead of sitting still; and he looked at Henry's partner with
a scrutinizing eye. "So," said he, at last, "I observe I have not been
thought worthy of your conversation to-night: this is what _gentlemen,
polite gentlemen_, who dance _reels_, call friendship!"

"If I had thought that you would have taken it ill I should dance
reels," said Henry, laughing, "I would have made the sacrifice of a
reel at the altar of friendship; but we don't come to a ball to make
sacrifices to friendship, but to divert ourselves."

"If we can," said Forester, sarcastically: here he was prevented from
reproaching his friend any longer, for a party of gentlemen began to
sing catches, at the desire of the rest of the company.

Forester was now intent upon criticising the nonsensical words that were
sung; and he was composing an essay upon the power of the ancient bards,
and the effect of national music, when Flora's voice interrupted him:
"Brother," said she, "I have won my wager." The wager was, that Forester
would not during supper observe the geranium that was placed in the
middle of the table.

As soon as the company were satisfied, both with their supper and their
songs, Henry, whose mind was always _present_, seized the moment when
there was silence to turn the attention of the company towards the
object upon which his own thoughts were intent. The lady-patroness, the
mistress of the canary-bird, had performed her promise: she had spoken
to several of her acquaintance concerning the tyrannical schoolmistress;
and now, fixing the attention of the company upon the geranium, she
appealed to Henry Campbell, and begged him to explain its history. A
number of eager eyes turned upon him instantly; and Forester felt, that
if he had been called upon in such a manner he could not have uttered
a syllable. He now felt the great advantage of being able to speak,
without hesitation or embarrassment, before numbers. When Henry related
the poor little girl's story, his language and manner were so unaffected
and agreeable, that he interested every one who heard him in his
cause. A subscription was immediately raised; every body was eager to
contribute something to the child, who had been so ready, for her old
grandmother's sake, to part with her favourite geranium. The lady who
superintended the charity-school agreed to breakfast the next morning at
Dr. Campbell's, and to go from his house to the school precisely at the
hour when the schoolmistress usually set her unfortunate scholars to
their extra task of spinning.

Forester was astonished at all this; he did not consider that negligence
and inhumanity are widely different. The lady-patronesses had,
perhaps, been rather negligent in contenting themselves with seeing the
charity-children _show well_ in procession to Church, and they had not
sufficiently inquired into the conduct of the schoolmistress; but, as
soon as the facts were properly stated, the ladies were eager to exert
themselves, and candidly acknowledged that they had been to blame in
trusting so much to the reports of the superficial visitors, who had
always declared that the school was going on perfectly well.

"More people who are in the wrong," said Dr. Campbell to Forester,
"would be corrected, if some people who are in the right had a little
candour and patience joined to their other virtues."

As the company rose from the supper-table, several young ladies gathered
round the geranium to admire Flora's pretty flower-pot. The black
stains, however, struck every eye. Forester was standing by rather
embarrassed. Flora, with her usual good-nature, refrained from all
explanation, though the exclamations of "How was that done?"--"Who could
have done that?" were frequently repeated.

"It was an accident," said Flora; and, to change the conversation, she
praised the beauty of the geranium; she gathered one of the fragrant
leaves, but, as she was going to put it amongst the flowers in her
bosom, she observed she had dropped her moss-rose. It was a rarity at
this time of year: it was a rose which Henry Camphell had raised in a
conservatory of his own construction.

"Oh, my brother's beautiful rose!" exclaimed Flora.

Forester, who had been much pleased by her good-nature about the stains
on the flower-pot, now, contrary to his habits, sympathized with her
concern for the loss of her brother's moss-rose. He even exerted himself
so far as to search under the benches and under the supper-table. He
was fortunate enough to find it; and eager to restore the prize, he
with more than his usual gallantry, but not with less than his customary
awkwardness, crept from under the table, and, stretching half his body
over a bench, pushed his arm between two young ladies into the midst
of the group which surrounded Flora. As his arm extended his wrist
appeared, and at the sight of that wrist all the young ladies shrank
back, with unequivocal tokens of disgust. They whispered--they tittered;
and many expressive looks were lost upon our hero, who still resolutely
held out the hand upon which every eye was fixed. "Here's your rose! Is
not this the rose?" said he, still advancing the dreaded hand to Flora,
whose hesitation and blushes surprised him. Mackenzie burst into a loud
laugh; and in a whisper, which all the ladies could hear, told Forester,
that "Miss Campbell was afraid to take the rose out of his hands, lest
she should catch from him what he had caught from the carter who
had brought him to Edinburgh, or from some of his companions at the
cobbler's."

Forester flung the rose he knew not where, sprung over the bench, rushed
between Flora and another lady, made towards the door in a straight
line, pushing every thing before him, till a passage was made for him by
the astonished crowd, who stood out of his way as if he had been a mad
dog.

"Forester!" cried Henry and Dr. Campbell, who were standing upon the
steps before the door, speaking about the carriages, "what's the matter?
where are you going? The carriage is coming to the door."

"I had rather walk--don't speak to me," said Forester; "I've been
insulted: I am in a passion, but I can command myself. I did not knock
him down. Pray let me pass!"

Our hero broke from Dr. Campbell and Henry with the strength of an
enraged animal from his keepers; and he must have found his way home by
instinct, for he ran on without considering how he went. He snatched the
light from the servant who opened the door at Dr. Campbell's--hurried
to his own apartment--locked, double-locked, and bolted the door--flung
himself into a chair, and, taking breath, exclaimed, "Thank God! I've
done no mischief. Thank God! I didn't knock him down. Thank God! he
is out of my sight, and I am cool now--quite cool: let me recollect it
all."

Upon the coolest recollection, Forester could not reconcile his pride to
his present circumstances. "Archibald spoke the truth--why am I angry?
why _was_ I angry, I mean!" He reasoned much with himself upon the
nature of true and false shame: he represented to himself that the
disorder which disfigured his hands was thought shameful only because it
was _vulgar_; that what was vulgar was not therefore immoral; that the
young tittering ladies who shrunk back from him were not supreme judges
of right and wrong; that he ought to despise their opinions, and he
despised them with all his might for two or three hours, as he walked
up and down his room with unremitting energy. At length our peripatetic
philosopher threw himself upon his bed, determined that his repose
should not be disturbed by such trifles: he had by this time worked
himself up to such a pitch of magnanimity, that he thought he could
with composure meet the disapproving eyes of millions of his
fellow-creatures; but he was alone when he formed this erroneous
estimate of the strength of the human mind. Wearied with passion and
reason, he fell asleep, dreamed that he was continually presenting
flowers, which nobody would accept; awakened at the imaginary repetition
of Archibald's laugh, composed himself again to sleep, and dreamed that
he was in a glover's shop, trying on gloves, and that, amongst a hundred
pair which he pulled on, he could not find one that would fit him.
Just as he tore the last pair in his hurry, he awakened, shook off his
foolish dream, saw the sun rising between two chimneys many feet below
his windows, recollected that in a short time he should be summoned to
breakfast, that all the lady-patronesses were to be at this breakfast,
that he could not breakfast in gloves, that Archibald would perhaps
again laugh, and Flora perhaps again shrink back. He reproached himself
for his weakness in foreseeing and dreading this scene: his aversion to
lady-patronesses and to balls was never at a more formidable height; he
sighed for liberty and independence, which he persuaded himself were
not to be had in his present situation. In one of his long walks he
remembered to have seen, at some miles' distance from the town of
Edinburgh, a gardener and his boy, who were singing at their work.
These men appeared to Forester to be yet happier than the cobbler, who
formerly was the object of his admiration; and he was persuaded that he
should be much happier at the gardener's cottage than he could ever be
at Dr. Campbell's house.

"I am not fit," said he to himself, "to live amongst _idle gentlemen_
and _ladies_; I should be happy if I were a useful member of society;
a gardener is a useful member of society, and I will be a gardener, and
live with gardeners."

Forester threw off the clothes which he had worn the preceding night at
the fatal ball, dressed himself in his old coat, tied up a small bundle
of linen, and took the road to the gardener's.

BREAKFAST.

When Henry found that Forester was not in his room in the morning, he
concluded that he had rambled out towards Salisbury Craigs, whither he
talked the preceding day of going to botanize.

"I am surprised," said Dr. Campbell, "that the young gentleman is out
so early, for I have a notion that he has not had much sleep since we
parted, unless he walks in his sleep, for he has been walking over my
poor head half the night."

Breakfast went on--no Forester appeared. Lady Catherine began to fear
that he had broken his neck upon Salisbury Craigs, and related all the
falls she had ever had, or had ever been near having, in carriages,
on horseback, or otherwise. She then entered into the geography of
Salisbury Craigs, and began to dispute upon the probability of his
having fallen to the east or to the west.

"My dear Lady Catherine," said Dr. Campbell, "we are not sure that he
has been upon Salisbury Craigs; whether he has fallen to the east or to
the west, we cannot, therefore, conveniently settle."

But Lady Catherine, whose prudential imagination travelled fast, went on
to inquire of Dr. Campbell, to whom the great Forester estate would
go in case of any accident having happened or happening to the young
gentleman before he should come of age.

Dr. Campbell was preparing to give her ladyship satisfaction upon this
point, when a servant put a letter into his hands. Henry looked in great
anxiety. Dr. Campbell glanced his eye over the letter, put it into
his pocket, and desired the servant to show the person who brought the
letter into his study.

"It's only a little boy," said Archibald; "I saw him as I passed through
the hall."

"Cannot a little boy go into my study?" said Dr. Campbell, coolly.

Archibald's curiosity was strongly excited, and he slipped out of the
room a few minutes afterward, resolved to speak to the boy, and to
discover the purpose of his embassy. But Dr. Campbell was behind him
before he was aware of his approach, and just as Archibald began to
cross-examine the boy in these words, "So you came from a young man who
is about my size?" Dr. Campbell put both his hands upon his shoulders,
saying, "He came from a young man who does not in the least resemble
you, believe me, Mr. Archibald Mackenzie."

Archibald started, turned round, and was so abashed by the civilly
contemptuous look with which Dr. Campbell pronounced these words, that
he retired from the study without even attempting any of his usual
equivocating apologies for his intrusion. Dr. Campbell now read
Forester's letter. It was as follows:--

"Dear Sir,

"Though I have quitted your house thus abruptly, I am not insensible of
your kindness. For the step I have taken, I can offer no apology merely
to my guardian; but you have treated me, Dr. Campbell, as your friend,
and I shall lay my whole soul open to you.

"Notwithstanding your kindness,--notwithstanding the friendship of
your son Henry, whose excellent qualities I know how to value,--I most
ingenuously own to you that I have been far from happy in your house. I
feel that I cannot be at ease in the vortex of dissipation; and the more
I see of the higher ranks of society, the more I regret that I was _born
a gentleman_. Neither my birth nor my fortune shall, however, restrain
me from pursuing that line of life which, I am persuaded, leads to
virtue and tranquillity. Let those who have no virtuous indignation obey
the voice of fashion, and at her commands let her slaves eat the bread
of idleness till it palls upon the sense! I reproach myself with having
yielded, as I have done of late, my opinions to the persuasions of
friendship; my mind has become enervated, and I must fly from the
fatal contagion. Thank Heaven, I have yet the power to fly: I have yet
sufficient force to break my chains. I am not yet reduced to the mental
degeneracy of the base monarch, who hugged his fetters because they were
of gold.

"I am conscious of powers that fit me for something better than to waste
my existence in a ball-room; and I will not sacrifice my liberty to
the absurd ceremonies of daily dissipation. I, that have been the
laughing-stock of the mean and frivolous, have yet sufficient manly
pride, unextinguished in my breast, to assert my claim to your esteem:
to assert, that I never have committed, or shall designedly commit, any
action unworthy of the friend of your son.

"I do not write to Henry, lest I should any way involve him in my
misfortunes: he is formed to shine in the _polite_ world, and his
connexion with me might tarnish the lustre of his character in the eyes
of the '_nice-judging fair_.' I hope, however, that he will not utterly
discard me from his heart, though I cannot dance a reel. I beg that he
will break open the lock of the trunk that is in my room, and take out
of it my Goldsmith's Animated Nature, which he seemed to like.

"In my table-drawer there are my Martyn's Letters on Botany, in which
you will find a number of plants that I have dried for Flora--_Miss_
Flora Campbell, I should say. After what passed last night, I can
scarcely _hope_ they will be accepted. I would rather have them burned
than refused; therefore please to burn them, and say nothing more upon
the subject. Dear sir, do not judge harshly of me; I have had a severe
conflict with myself before I could resolve to leave you. But I would
rather that you should judge of me with severity than that you should
extend to me the same species of indulgence with which you last night
viewed the half-intoxicated baronet.

"I can bear any thing but contempt.

"Yours, &c.

"P.S. I trust that you will not question the bearer; he knows where I
am; I therefore put you on your guard. I mean to earn my own bread as
a gardener; I have always preferred the agricultural to the commercial
system."

To this letter, in which the mixture of sense and extravagance did not
much surprise Dr. Campbell, he returned the following answer:--

"My dear cobbler, gardener, orator, or by whatever other name you choose
to be addressed, I am too old to be surprised at any thing, otherwise I
might have been rather surprised at some things in your eloquent letter.
You tell me that you have the power to fly, and that you do not hug your
chains, though they are of gold! Are you an alderman, or Daedalus? or
are these only figures of speech? You inform me, that you cannot live
in the vortex of dissipation, or eat the bread of idleness, and that you
are determined to be a gardener. These things seem to have no necessary
connexion with each other. Why you should reproach yourself so bitterly
for having spent one evening of your life in a ball-room, which I
suppose is what you allude to when you speak of a vortex of dissipation,
I am at a loss to discover. And why you cannot, with so much honest
pride yet unextinguished in your breast, find any occupation more worthy
of your talents, and as useful to society, as that of a gardener, I own,
puzzles me a little. Consider these things coolly; return to dinner, and
we will compare at our leisure the advantages of the mercantile and
the agricultural system. I forbear to question your messenger, as you
desire; and I shall not show your letter to Henry till after we have
dined. I hope by that time you will insist upon my burning it; which,
at your request, I shall do with pleasure, although it contains several
good sentences. As I am not yet sure you have _departed this life_, I
shall not enter upon my office of executor; I shall not break open the
lock of your trunk (of which I hope you will some time, when your mind
is less exalted, find the key), nor shall I stir in the difficult case
of Flora's legacy. When next you write your will, let me, for the sake
of your executor, advise you to be more precise in your directions; for
what can be done if you order him to give and burn the same thing in
the same sentence? As you have, amongst your other misfortunes, the
misfortune to be born heir to five or six thousand a year, you should
learn a little how to manage your own affairs, lest you should, amongst
your _poor_ or _rich_ companions, meet with some who are not quite so
honest as yourself.

"If, instead of returning to dine with us, you should persist in your
gardening scheme, I shall have less esteem for your good sense, but I
shall forbear to reproach you. I shall leave you to learn by your own
experience, if it be not in my power to give you the advantages of mine
gratis. But, at the same time, I shall discover where you are, and shall
inform myself exactly of all your proceedings. This, as your guardian,
is my duty. I should further warn you, that I shall not, whilst you
choose to live in a rank below your own, supply you with your customary
yearly allowance. Two hundred guineas a year would be an extravagant
allowance in your present circumstances. I do not mention money with any
idea of influencing your generous mind by mercenary motives; but it
is necessary that you should not deceive yourself by inadequate
experiments: you cannot be rich and poor at the same time. I gave you
the day before yesterday five ten-pound notes for your last quarterly
allowance; I suppose you have taken these with you, therefore you cannot
be in any immediate distress for money. I am sorry, I own, that you are
so well provided, because a man who has fifty guineas in his pocket-book
cannot distinctly feel what it is to be compelled to earn his own bread.

"Do not, my dear ward, think me harsh; my friendship for you gives me
courage to inflict present pain, with a view to your future advantage.
You must not expect to see any thing of your friend Henry until you
return to us. I shall, as his father and your guardian, request that he
will trust implicitly to my prudence upon this occasion; that he will
make no inquiries concerning you; and that he will abstain from all
connexion with you whilst you absent yourself from your friends. You
cannot live amongst the vulgar (by the vulgar I mean the ill-educated,
the ignorant, those who have neither noble sentiments nor agreeable
manners), and at the same time enjoy the pleasures of cultivated
society. I shall wait, not without anxiety, till your choice be decided.

"Believe me to be

"Your sincere friend and guardian,

"H. CAMPBELL."

As soon as Dr. Campbell had despatched this letter, he returned to the
company. The ladies, after breakfast, proceeded to the charity-school;
but Henry was so anxious to learn what was become of his friend
Forester, that he could scarcely enjoy the effects of his own benevolent
exertions. It was with difficulty, such as he had never before
experienced, that Dr. Campbell obtained from him the promise to suspend
all intercourse with Forester. Henry's first impulse, when he read the
letter, which his father now found it prudent to show him, was to search
for his friend instantly. "I am sure," said he, "I shall be able to
find him out; and if I can but see him, and speak to him, I know I could
prevail upon him to return to us."

"Yes," said Dr. Campbell, "perhaps you might persuade him to return;
but that is not the object: unless his understanding be convinced, what
should we gain?"

"It should be convinced. I _could_ convince him," cried Henry.

"I have, my dear son," said Dr. Campbell, smiling, "the highest opinion
of your logic and eloquence; but are your reasoning powers stronger
to-day than they were yesterday? Have you any new arguments to produce?
I thought you had exhausted your whole store without effect."

Henry paused.

"Believe me," continued his father, lowering his voice, "I am not
insensible to your friend's good, and, I will say, _great_ qualities; I
do not leave him to suffer evils, without feeling as much perhaps as you
can do; but I am convinced, that the solidity of his character, and the
happiness of his whole life, will depend upon the impression that is now
made upon his mind by _realities_. He will see society as it is. He
has abilities and generosity of mind which will make him a first-rate
character, if his friends do not spoil him out of false kindness."

Henry, at these words, held out his hand to his father, and gave him the
promise which he desired.

"But," added he, "I still have hopes from your letter--I should not be
surprised to see Forester at dinner to-day."

"I should," said Dr. Campbell.

Dr. Campbell, alas! was right. Henry looked eagerly towards the door
every time it opened, when they were at dinner: but he was continually
disappointed. Flora, whose gaiety usually enlivened the evenings, and
agreeably relieved her father and brother after their morning studies,
was now silent.

Whilst Lady Catherine's volubility overpowered even the philosophy
of Dr. Campbell, she wondered--she never ceased wondering--that Mr.
Forester did not appear, and that the doctor and Mrs. Campbell, and
Henry and Flora, were not more alarmed. She proposed sending twenty
different messengers after him. She was now convinced, that he had not
fallen from Salisbury Craigs, because Dr. Campbell assured her ladyship,
that he had a letter from him in his pocket, and that he was safe; but
she thought that there was imminent danger of his enlisting in a frolic,
or, perhaps, marrying some cobbler's daughter in a pet. She turned to
Archibald Mackenzie, and exclaimed, "He was at a cobbler's; it could
not be merely to mend his shoes. What sort of a lassy is the cobbler's
daughter? or has the cobbler a daughter?"

"She is hump-backed, luckily," said Dr. Campbell, coolly.

"That does not signify," said Lady Catherine; "I'm convinced she is at
the bottom of the whole mystery; for I once heard Mr. Forester say--and
I'm sure you must recollect it, Flora, my dear, for he looked at you at
the time--I once heard him say, that personal beauty was no merit, and
that ugly people ought to be liked--or some such thing--out of humanity.
Now, out of humanity, with his odd notions, it's ten to one, Dr.
Campbell, he marries this cobbler's hump-backed daughter. I'm sure, if I
were his guardian, I could not rest an instant with such a thought in my
head."

"Nor I," said Dr. Campbell, quietly; and in spite of her ladyship's
astonishment, remonstrances, and conjectures, he maintained his resolute
composure.

THE GARDENER.

The gardener who had struck Forester's fancy, was a square, thick,
obstinate-eyed, hard-working, ignorant, elderly man, whose soul was
intent upon his petty daily gains, and whose honesty was of that
"coarse-spun, vulgar sort{6}," which alone can be expected from men of
uncultivated minds. Mr. M'Evoy, for that was the gardener's name, was
both good-natured and selfish; his views and ideas all centered in
his own family; and his affection was accumulated and reserved for two
individuals, his son and his daughter. The son was not so industrious
as the father; he was ambitious of seeing something of the world, and
he consorted with all the young 'prentices in Edinburgh, who would
condescend to forget that he was a country boy, and to remember that
he expected, when his father should die, _to be rich_. Mr. M'Evoy's
daughter was an ugly, cross-looking girl, who spent all the money that
she could either earn or save upon ribands and fine gowns, with which
she fancied she could supply all the defects of her person.

{Footnote 6: Mrs. Barbauld'a Essay on the Inconsistency of Human
Expectations.}

This powerful motive for her economy operated incessantly upon her mind,
and she squeezed all that could possibly be squeezed for her private use
from the frugal household. The boy, whose place Forester thought himself
so fortunate to supply, had left the gardener, because he could not bear
to work and be scolded without eating or drinking.

The gardener willingly complied with our hero's first request; he gave
him a spade, and he set him to work. Forester dug with all the energy
of an enthusiast, and dined like a philosopher upon long kail; but long
kail did not charm him so much the second day as it had done the first;
and the third day it was yet less to his taste; besides, he began to
notice the difference between oaten and wheaten bread. He, however,
recollected that Cyrus lived, when he was a lad, upon water-cresses--the
black broth of the Spartans he likewise remembered, and he would not
complain. He thought, that he should soon accustom himself to his
scanty, homely fare. A number of the disagreeable circumstances of
poverty he had not estimated when he entered upon his new way of life;
and though at Dr. Campbell's table he had often said to himself, "I
could do very well without all these things," yet, till he had actually
tried the experiment, he had not _clear_ ideas upon the subject. He
missed a number of little pleasures and conveniences, which he had
scarcely noticed, whilst they had every day presented themselves as
matters of course. The occupation of digging was laborious, but it
afforded no exercise to his mind, and he felt most severely the want of
Henry's agreeable conversation; he had no one to whom he could now talk
of the water-cresses of Cyrus, or the black broth of the Spartans;
he had no one with whom he could dispute concerning the Stoic or the
Epicurean doctrines, the mercantile or the agricultural system. Many
objections to the agricultural system, which had escaped him, occurred
now to his mind; and his compassion for the worms, whom he was obliged
to cut in pieces continually with his spade, acted every hour more
forcibly upon his benevolent heart. He once attempted to explain his
feelings for the worms to the gardener, who stared at him with all
the insolence of ignorance, and bade him mind his work, with a tone of
authority which ill suited Forester's feelings and love of independence.

"Is ignorance thus to command knowledge? Is reason thus to be silenced
by boorish stupidity?" said Forester to himself, as he recollected the
patience and candour with which Dr. Campbell and Henry used to converse
with him. He began to think, that in cultivated society he had enjoyed
more liberty of mind, more freedom of opinion, than he could taste in
the company of an illiterate gardener. The gardener's son, though his
name was Colin, had no Arcadian simplicity, nothing which could please
the classic taste of Forester, or which could recall to his mind the
Eclogues of Virgil, or the golden age; the Gentle Shepherd, or the
Ayrshire Ploughman. Colin's favourite holiday's diversion was playing at
_goff_; this game, which is played with a bat loaded with lead, and with
a ball, which is harder than a cricket-ball, requires much strength and
dexterity. Forester used, sometimes, to accompany the gardener's son to
the _Links_,{7} where numbers of people, of different descriptions are
frequently seen practising this diversion. Our hero was ambitious of
excelling at the game of _goff_; and, as he was not particularly adroit,
he exposed himself, in his first attempts, to the derision of the
spectators, and he likewise received several severe blows. Colin laughed
at him without mercy; and Forester could not help comparing the rude
expressions of his new companion's untutored vanity with the unassuming
manners and unaffected modesty of Henry Campbell. Forester soon took an
aversion to the game of _goff_, and recollected Scotch reels with less
contempt.

{Footnote 7: A lea or common near Edinburgh.}

One evening, after having finished his task of digging (for digging was
now become a task), he was going to take a walk to Duddingstone lake,
when Colin, who was at the same instant setting out for the Links,
roughly insisted upon Forester's accompanying him. Our hero, who was
never much disposed to yield to the taste of others, positively refused
the gardener's son, with some imprudent expressions of contempt.
From this moment Colin became his enemy, and, by a thousand malicious
devices, contrived to show his vulgar hatred.

Forester now, to his great surprise, discovered that hatred could exist
in a cottage. Female vanity, he likewise presently perceived, was not
confined to the precincts of a ball-room; he found that Miss M'Evoy
spent every leisure moment in the contemplation of her own coarse image
in a fractured looking-glass. He once ventured to express his dislike
of a many-coloured plaid in which Miss M'Evoy had arrayed herself _for
a dance_; and the fury of her looks, and the loud-toned vulgarity of
her conceit, were strongly contrasted with the recollection of
Flora Campbell's gentle manners and sweetness of temper. The painted
flower-pot was present to his imagination, and he turned from the lady
who stood before him with an air of disgust, which he had neither
the wish nor the power to conceal. The consequences of offending this
high-spirited damsel our hero had not sufficiently considered: the
brother and sister, who seldom agreed in any thing else, now agreed,
though from different motives, in an eager desire to torment Forester.
Whenever he entered the cottage, either to rest himself, or to partake
of those "savoury messes, which the _neat-handed_ Phillis dresses," he
was received with sullen silence, or with taunting reproach. The old
gardener, stupid as he was, Forester thought an agreeable companion,
compared with his insolent son and his vixen daughter. The happiest
hours of the day, to our hero, were those which he spent at his work;
his affections, repressed and disappointed, became a source of misery to
him.

"Is there nothing in this world to which I can attach myself?" said
Forester, as he one day leaned upon his spade in a melancholy mood.
"Must I spend my life in the midst of absurd altercations? Is it for
this that I have a heart and an understanding? No one here comprehends
one word I say--I am an object of contempt and hatred, whilst my soul
is formed for the most benevolent feelings, and capable of the most
extensive views. And of what service am I to my fellow-creatures? Even
this stupid gardener, even a common labourer, is as useful to society as
I am. Compared with Henry Campbell, what am I? Oh, Henry!--Flora!--could
you see me at this instant, you would pity me."

But the fear of being an object of pity wakened Forester's pride; and
though he felt that he was unhappy, he could not bear to acknowledge
that he had mistaken the road to happiness. His imaginary picture of
rural felicity was not, to be sure, realized; but he resolved to bear
his disappointment with fortitude, to fulfil his engagements with
his master, the gardener, and then to seek some other more eligible
situation. In the meantime, his benevolence tried to expand itself upon
the only individual in this family who treated him tolerably well: he
grew fond of the old gardener, because there was nothing else near him
to which he could attach himself, not even a dog or a cat. The old man,
whose temper was not quite so enthusiastical as Forester's, looked
upon him as an industrious simple young man, above the usual class of
servants, and rather wished to keep him in his service, because he gave
him less than the current wages. Forester, after his late reflections
upon digging, began to think, that, by applying his understanding to
the business of gardening, he might perhaps make some discoveries, which
should excite his master's everlasting gratitude, and immortalize
his own name. He pledged a shirt and a pair of stockings at a poor
bookseller's stall, for some volumes upon gardening; and these, in spite
of the ridicule of Colin and Miss M'Evoy, he studied usually at his
meals. He at length met with an account of some experiments upon
fruit-trees, which he thought would infallibly make the gardener's
fortune.

"Did you not tell me," said Forester to the gardener, "that cherries
were sometimes sold very high in Edinburgh?"

"Five a penny," said the gardener; and he wished, from the bottom of his
heart, that he had a thousand cherry-trees, but he possessed only one.

He was considerably alarmed, when Forester proposed to him, as the
certain means of making his fortune, to strip the bark off this
cherry-tree, assuring him, that a similar experiment had been tried and
had succeeded; that his cherry-tree would bear twice as many cherries,
if he would only strip the bark from it. "Let me try one branch for an
experiment--I _will try_ one branch!"

But the gardener peremptorily forbade all experiments, and, shutting
Forester's book, bade him leave such nonsense, and mind his business.

Provoked by this instance of tyrannical ignorance, Forester forgot
his character of a _servant boy_, and at length called his master an
obstinate fool.

No sooner were these words uttered, than the gardener emptied the
remains of his watering-pot coolly in Forester's face, and, first paying
him his wages, dismissed him from his service.

Miss M'Evoy, who was at work, seated at the door, made room most
joyfully for Forester to pass, and observed, that she had long since
prophesied he would not _do_ for them.

Forester was now convinced, that it was impossible to reform a positive
old gardener, to make him try new experiments upon cherry-trees, or to
interest him for the progress of science. He deplored the perversity
of human nature, and he began, when he reflected upon the characters of
Miss M'Evoy and her brother, to believe, that they were beings distinct
from the rest of their species; he was, at all events, glad to have
parted with such odious companions. On his road to Edinburgh he had time
for various reflections.

"Thirty shillings, then, with hard bodily labour, I have earned for one
month's service!" said Forester to himself. "Well, I will keep to my
resolution. I will live upon the money I earn, and upon that alone; I
will not have recourse to my bank notes till the last extremity." He
took out his pocket-book, however, and looked at them, to see that
they were safe. "How wretched," thought he, "must be that being, who
is obliged to purchase, in his utmost need, the assistance of his
fellow-creatures with such vile trash as this! I have been unfortunate
in my first experiment; but all men are not like this selfish gardener
and his brutal son, incapable of disinterested friendship."

Here Forester was interrupted in his meditations by a young man, who
accosted him with--"Sir, if I don't mistake, I believe I have a key of
yours."

Forester looked up at the young man's face, and recollected him to be
the person who had nearly lost his life in descending for his key into
the brewing-vat.

"I knew you again, sir," continued the brewer's clerk, "by your twirling
those scissors upon your finger, just as you were doing that day at the
brewery."

Forester was not conscious, till this moment, that he had a pair of
scissors in his hand: whilst the gardener was paying him his wages, to
relieve his _mauvaise honte_, our hero took up Miss M'Evoy's scissors,
which lay upon the table, and twirled them upon his fingers, as he used
to do with a key. He was rather ashamed to perceive, that he had not yet
cured himself of such a silly habit. "I thought the lesson I got at the
brewery," said he, "would have cured me for ever of this foolish trick;
but the diminutive chains of habit{8}, as somebody says, are scarcely
ever heavy enough to be felt, till they are too strong to be broken."

{Footnote 8: Dr. Johnson's Vision of Theodore.}

"_Sir!_" said the astonished clerk.

"Oh, I beg your pardon," said our hero, who now perceived by his
countenance that his observation on the peculiar nature of the chains
of habit was utterly unintelligible to him; "pray, sir, can you tell me
what o'clock it is?"

"Half after four--I am--sir," said the clerk, producing his watch, with
the air of a man who thought a watch a matter of some importance. "Hum!
He can't be a gentleman; he has no watch!" argued he with himself; and
he looked at Forester's rough apparel with astonishment. Forester had
turned back, that he might return Miss M'Evoy her scissors. The brewer's
clerk was going in the same direction to collect some money for his
master. As they walked on, the young man talked to our hero with
good-nature, but with a species of familiarity, which was strikingly
different from the respectful manner in which he formerly addressed
Forester, when he had seen him in a better coat, and in the company of a
young gentleman.

"You have left Dr. Campbell's, then?" said he, looking with curiosity.
Forester replied, that he had left Dr. Campbell's, because he preferred
earning his own bread to living an idle life among gentlemen and ladies.

The clerk, at this speech, looked earnestly in Forester's face, and
began to suspect that he was deranged in his mind.

As the gravity of our hero's looks, and the sobriety of his demeanour,
did not give any strong indications of insanity, the clerk, after a few
minutes' consideration, inclined to believe, that Forester concealed the
truth from him; that probably he was some dependant of Dr. Campbell's
family; that he had displeased his friends, and had been discarded in
disgrace. He was confirmed in these suppositions by Forester's telling
him, that he had just left the service of a gardener; that he did not
know where to find a lodging for the night; and that he was in want of
some employment, by which he might support himself independently.

The clerk, who remembered with gratitude the intrepidity with which
Forester had hazarded his life to save him the morning that he was at
the brewery, and who had also some compassion for a young gentleman
reduced to poverty, told him that if he could write a good hand, knew
any thing of accounts, and could get a character for _punctuality_
(meaning to include honesty in this word) from any creditable people,
he did not doubt that his master, who had large concerns, might find
employment for him as an under-clerk. Forester's pride was not agreeably
soothed by the manner of this proposal, but he was glad to hear of a
_situation_, to use the clerk's genteel expression; and he moreover
thought, that he should now have an opportunity of comparing the
commercial and agricultural systems.

The clerk hinted, that he supposed Forester would choose to "make
himself smart," before he called to offer himself at the brewery, and
advised him to call about six, as by that time in the evening his master
was generally at leisure.

A dinner at a public-house (for our hero did not know where else to
dine), and the further expense of a new pair of shoes, and some other
articles of dress, almost exhausted his month's wages: he was very
unwilling to make any of these purchases, but the clerk assured him,
that they were indispensable; and, indeed, at last, his appearance was
scarcely upon a par with that of his friendly adviser.

THE BET.

Before we follow Forester to the brewery, we must request the attention
of our readers to the history of a bet of Mr. Archibald Mackenzie's.

We have already noticed the rise and progress of this young gentleman's
acquaintance with Sir Philip Gosling. Archibald,

     "Whose ev'ry frolic had some end in view,
     Ne'er played the fool, but played the rascal too,"
     --Anonymous

cultivated assiduously the friendship of this weak, dissipated, vain
young baronet, in hopes that he might, in process of time, make some
advantage of his folly. Sir Philip had an unfortunately high opinion of
his own judgment; an opinion which he sometimes found it difficult to
inculcate upon the minds of others, till he hit upon the compendious
method of laying high wagers in support of all his assertions. Few
people chose to venture a hundred guineas upon the turn of a straw. Sir
Philip, in all such contests, came off victorious; and he plumed himself
much upon the success of his purse. Archibald affected the greatest
deference for Sir Philip's judgment; and, as he observed that the
baronet piqued himself upon his skill as a jockey, he flattered him
indefatigably upon this subject. He accompanied Sir Philip continually
in his long visits to the livery-stables; and he made himself familiarly
acquainted with the keeper of the livery-stables, and even with the
hostlers. So low can interested pride descend! All this pains Archibald
took, and more, for a very small object. He had set his fancy upon
Sawney, one of his friend's horses; and he had no doubt, but that he
should either induce Sir Philip to make him a present of this horse, or
that he should jockey him out of it, by some well-timed bet.

In counting upon the baronet's generosity, Archibald was mistaken. Sir
Philip had that species of _good-nature_ which can lend, but not
that which can give. He offered to lend the horse to Archibald
most willingly; but the idea of giving it was far distant from his
imagination. Archibald, who at length despaired of his friend's
generosity, had recourse to his other scheme of the wager. After having
judiciously lost a few guineas to Sir Philip in wagers, to confirm him
in his extravagant opinion of his own judgment, Archibald, one evening,
when the fumes of wine and vanity, operating together, had somewhat
exalted the man of judgment's imagination, urged him, by artful,
hesitating contradiction, to assert the most incredible things of one of
his horses, to whom he had given the name of Favourite. Archibald knew,
from the _best authority_--from the master of the livery-stables, who
was an experienced jockey--that Favourite was by no means a match for
Sawney; he therefore waited quietly till Sir Philip Gosling laid a
very considerable wager upon the head of his "Favourite." Archibald
immediately declared, he could not, in conscience--that he could not,
for the honour of Scotland, give up his friend Sawney.

"Sawney!" cried Sir Philip; "I'll bet fifty guineas, that Favourite
beats him hollow at a walk, trot, or gallop, whichever you please."

Archibald artfully affected to be startled at this defiance, and,
seemingly desirous to draw back, pleaded his inability to measure purses
with such a rich man as Sir Philip.

"Nay, my boy," replied Sir Philip, "that excuse shan't stand you in
stead. You have a pretty little pony there, that Lady Catherine has just
given you; if you won't lay me fifty guineas, will you risk your pony
against my judgment?"

Archibald had now brought his friend exactly to the point at which
he had been long aiming. Sir Philip staked his handsome horse Sawney
against Archibald's sorry pony, upon this wager, that Favourite should,
at the first trials, beat Sawney at a walk, a trot, and a gallop.

Warmed with wine, and confident in his own judgment, the weak baronet
insisted upon having the bet immediately decided. The gentlemen ordered
out their horses, and the wager was to be determined upon the sands of
Leith.

Sir Philip Gosling, to his utter astonishment, found himself for once
mistaken in his judgment. The treacherous Archibald coolly suffered him
to exhale his passion in unavailing oaths, and at length rejoiced to
hear him consoling himself with the boast, that this was the first wager
upon horse-flesh that he had ever lost in his life. The master of the
livery-stables stared with well-affected incredulity, when Sir Philip,
upon his return from the sands of Leith, informed him, that Favourite
had been beat hollow by Sawney; and Archibald, by his additional
testimony, could scarcely convince him of the fact, till he put two
guineas into his hand, when he recommended _his_ new horse Sawney to his
particular care. Sir Philip, who was not gifted with quick observation,
did not take notice of this last convincing argument. Whilst this
passed, he was talking eagerly to the hostler, who confirmed him in his
opinion, which he still repeated as loud as ever, "that Favourite ought
to have won." This point Archibald prudently avoided to contest; and he
thus succeeded in duping and flattering his friend at once.

"Sawney for ever!" cried Archibald, as soon as Sir Philip had left
the stables. "Sawney for ever!" repeated the hostler, and reminded
Mackenzie, that he had promised him half a guinea. Archibald had no
money in his pocket; but he assured the hostler, that he would remember
him the next day. The next day, however, Archibald, who was expert in
parsimonious expedients, considered that he had better delay giving the
hostler his half-guinea, till it had been earned by his care of Sawney.

It is the usual error of cunning people to take it for granted, that
others are fools. This hostler happened to be a match for our young
laird in cunning, and, as soon as he perceived that it was Archibald's
intention to cheat him of the interest of his half-guinea, he determined
to revenge himself in his _care_ of Sawney. We shall hereafter see the
success of his devices.

THE SADDLE AND BRIDLE.

Scarcely had Archibald Mackenzie been two days in possession of the
long-wished-for object of his mean soul, when he became dissatisfied
with his own saddle and bridle, which certainly did not, as Sir Philip
observed, suit his new horse. The struggles in Archibald's mind, betwixt
his taste for expense and his habits of saving, were often rather
painful to him. He had received from Lady Catherine a ten-guinea
note, when he first came to Dr. Campbell's; and he had withstood many
temptations to change it. One morning (the day that he had accompanied
Henry and Forester to the watchmaker's) he was so strongly charmed
by the sight of a watch-chain and seals, that he actually took his
bank-note out of his scrutoire at his return home, put it into his
pocket, when he dressed for dinner, and resolved to call that evening
at the watchmaker's to indulge his fancy, by purchasing the watch-chain,
and to gratify his family pride, by getting his coat of arms splendidly
engraven upon the seal. He called at the watchmaker's, in company with
Sir Philip Gosling, but he could not agree with him respecting the
price of the chain and seals; and Archibald consoled himself with the
reflection, that his bank-note would still remain. He held the note in
his hand, whilst he higgled about the price of the watch-chain.

"Oh, d--n the expense!" cried Sir Philip.

"Oh, I mind ten guineas as little as any man," said Archibald, thrusting
the bank-note, in imitation of the baronet, with affected carelessness,
into his waistcoat-pocket. He was engaged that night to go to the
play with Sir Philip, and he was much hurried in dressing. His servant
observed that his waistcoat was stained, and looked out another for him.

Now this man sometimes took the liberty of wearing his master's clothes;
and, when Archibald went to the play, the servant dressed himself in the
stained waistcoat, to appear at a ball, which was given that night in
the neighbourhood, by some "gentleman's gentleman." The waistcoat was
rather too tight for the servant: he tore it, and instead of sending it
to the washerwoman's, to have the stain washed out, as his master
had desired, he was now obliged to send it to the tailor's to have it
mended.

Archibald's sudden wish for a new saddle and bridle for Sawney could not
be gratified without changing the bank-note; and, forgetting that he
had left it in the pocket of his waistcoat the night that he went to the
play, he searched for it in the scrutoire, in which he was accustomed to
keep his treasures. He was greatly disturbed, when the note was not
to be found in the scrutoire; he searched over and over again; not
a pigeon-hole, not a drawer, remained to be examined. He tried to
recollect when he had last seen it, and at length remembered, that he
put it into his waistcoat-pocket, when he went to the watchmaker's; that
he had taken it out to look at, whilst he was in the shop; but whether
he had brought it home safely or not he could not precisely ascertain.
His doubts upon this subject, however, he cautiously concealed,
resolved, if possible, to make somebody or other answerable for his
loss. He summoned his servant, told him that he had left a ten-guinea
bank-note in his waistcoat-pocket the night that he went to the play,
and that, as the waistcoat was given into his charge, he must be
answerable for the note. The servant boldly protested, that he neither
could nor would be at the loss of a note which he had never seen.

Archibald now softened his tone; for he saw, that he had no chance of
bullying the servant. "I desired you to send it to the washerwoman's,"
said he.

"And so I did, sir," said the man.

This was true, but not the whole truth. He had previously sent the
waistcoat to the tailor's to have the rent repaired, which it received
the night he wore it at the ball. These circumstances the servant
thought proper to suppress; and he was very ready to agree with his
master in accusing the poor washerwoman of having stolen the note. The
washerwoman was extremely industrious, and perfectly honest; she had a
large family, that depended upon her labour, and upon her character, for
support. She was astonished and shocked at the charge that was brought
against her, and declared, that if she were able, she would rather pay
the whole money at once, than suffer any suspicion to go abroad against
her. Archibald rejoiced to find her in this disposition; and he assured
her, that the only method to avoid disgrace, a lawsuit, and ruin, was
instantly to pay, or to promise to pay, the money. It was out of her
power to pay it; and she would not promise what she knew she could not
perform.

Archibald redoubled his threats; the servant stood by his master. The
poor woman burst into tears; but she steadily declared that she was
innocent; and no promise could be extorted from her, even in the
midst of her terror. Though she had horrible, perhaps not absolutely
visionary, ideas of the dangers of a lawsuit, yet she had some
confidence in the certainty that justice was on her side. Archibald
said, that she might _talk_ about justice as much as she pleased, but
that she must prepare to submit to _the law_. The woman trembled at the
sound of these words; but, though ignorant, she was no fool, and she had
a friend in Dr. Campbell's family, to whom she resolved to apply in her
distress. Henry Campbell had visited her little boy when he was ill,
and had made him some small present; and, though she did not mean to
encroach upon Henry's good-nature, she thought, that he had so much
_learning_, that he certainly could, without its costing her any thing,
put her in the right way to avoid the _law_, with which she had been
threatened by Archibald Mackenzie and his servant.

Henry heard the story with indignation, such as Forester would have
felt in similar circumstances; but prudence tempered his enthusiastic
feelings; and prudence renders us able to assist others, whilst
enthusiasm frequently defeats its own purposes, and injures those whom
it wildly attempts to serve. Henry, knowing the character of Archibald,
governed himself accordingly; he made no appeal to his feelings; for
he saw that the person must be deficient in humanity, who could have
threatened a defenceless woman with such severity; he did not speak of
justice to the tyrannical laird, but spoke of _law_. He told Archibald,
that being thoroughly convinced of the woman's innocence, he had drawn
up a statement of her case, which she, in compliance with his advice,
was ready to lay before an advocate, naming the first counsel in
Edinburgh.

The young laird repeated, with a mixture of apprehension and suspicion,
"Drawn up a case! No; you can't know how to draw up cases; you are not a
lawyer--you only say this to bully me."

Henry replied, that he was no lawyer; that he could, notwithstanding,
state plain facts in such a manner, he hoped, as to make a case
intelligible to any sensible lawyer; that he meant to show what he had
written to his father.

"You'll show it to me, first, won't you?" said Archibald, who wished to
gain time for consideration.

Henry put the paper, which he had drawn up, into his hands, and waited
with a determined countenance beside him, whilst he perused the case.
Archibald saw that Henry had abilities and steadiness to go through with
the business; the facts were so plainly and forcibly stated, that
his hopes even from law began to falter. He therefore talked about
humanity--said, he pitied the poor woman; could not bear to think of
distressing her; but that, at the same time, he had urgent occasion for
money; that, if he could even recover five guineas of it, it would be
something. He added, that he had debts, which he could not, in honour,
delay to discharge.

Now Henry had five guineas, which he had reserved for the purchase of
some additions to his cabinet of mineralogy, and he offered to lend
this money to Archibald, to pay _the debts that he could not, in honour,
delay to discharge_, upon express condition, that he should say nothing
more to the poor woman concerning the bank-note.

To this condition Archibald most willingly acceded; and as Henry, with
generous alacrity, counted the five guineas into his hand, this mean,
incorrigible being said to himself, "What fools these bookish young men
are, after all! Though he can draw up cases so finely, I've taken him in
at last; and I wish it were ten guineas instead of five!"

Fatigued with the recital of the various petty artifices of this
avaricious and dissipated young laird, we shall now relieve ourselves,
by turning from the history of meanness to that of enthusiasm. The
faults of Forester we hope and wish to see corrected; but who can be
interested for the selfish Archibald Mackenzie?

FORESTER, A CLERK.

We left Forester when he was just going to offer himself as clerk to
a brewer. The brewer was a prudent man; and he sent one of his porters
with a letter to Dr. Campbell, to inform him that a young lad, whom
he had formerly seen in company with Mr. Henry Campbell, and who, he
understood, was the doctor's ward, had applied to him, and that he
should be very happy to take him into his service, if his friends
approved of it, and could properly recommend him. In consequence of Dr.
Campbell's answer to the brewer's letter, Forester, who knew nothing of
the application to his friends, obtained the vacant clerkship. He did
not, however, long continue in his new _situation_. At first he felt
happy, when he found himself relieved from the vulgar petulance of Miss
M'Evoy and her brother Colin: in comparison with their rude ill-humours,
the clerks who were his companions appeared patterns of civility. By
hard experience, Forester was taught to know, that obliging manners in
our companions add something to the happiness of our lives. "My mind
to me a kingdom is," was once his common answer to all that his friend
Henry could urge in favour of the pleasures of society; but he began now
to suspect, that separated from social intercourse, his mind, however
enlarged, would afford him but a dreary kingdom.

He flattered himself, that he could make a friend of the clerk who
had found his key: this young man's name was Richardson; he was
good-natured, but ignorant; and neither his education nor his abilities
distinguished him from any other clerk in similar circumstances.
Forester invited him to walk to Arthur's Seat, after the _monotonous_
business of the day was over, but the clerk preferred walking on
holidays in Prince's-street; and, after several ineffectual attempts to
engage him in moral and metaphysical arguments, our hero discovered
the depth of his companion's ignorance with astonishment. Once, when he
found that two of the clerks, to whom he had been talking of Cicero and
Pliny, did not know any thing of these celebrated personages, he said,
with a sigh,

     "But knowledge to their eyes her ample page,
        Rich with the spoils of time, did ne'er unroll;
      Chill penury repressed their noble rage,
        And froze the genial current of their soul."

The word _penury_, in this stanza, the clerks at least understood, and
it excited their "noble rage;" they hinted, that it ill became a person,
who did not dress nearly as well as themselves, to give himself such
airs, and to taunt his betters with poverty; they said that they
supposed, because he was an Englishman, as they perceived by his accent,
he thought he might insult Scotchmen as he pleased. It was vain for him
to attempt any explanation; their pride and their prejudices combined
against him: and, though their dislike to him was not so outrageous as
that of the gardener, gentle Colin, yet it was quite sufficient to
make him uneasy in his situation. Richardson was as steady as could
reasonably be expected; but he showed so little desire to have "_the
ample page, rich with the spoils of time_," unrolled to him, that he
excited our young scholar's contempt. No friendships can be more unequal
than those between ignorance and knowledge. We pass over the journal of
our hero's hours, which were spent in casting up and verifying accounts;
this occupation, at length he decided, must be extremely injurious to
the human understanding: "All the higher faculties of my soul," said he
to himself, "are absolutely useless at this work, and I am reduced to
a mere machine." But there were many other circumstances in the
_mercantile system_, which Forester had not foreseen, and which shocked
him extremely. The continual attention to petty gain, the little
artifices which a tradesman thinks himself justifiable in practising
upon his customers, could not be endured by his ingenuous mind. One
morning the brewery was in an uncommon bustle; the clerks were all in
motion. Richardson told Forester that they expected a visit in a few
hours from the gauger and the supervisor, and that they were preparing
for their reception. When the nature of these preparations was explained
to Forester; when he was made to understand that the business and duty
of a brewer's clerk was to assist his master in evading certain clauses
in certain acts of parliament; when he found, that to trick a gauger
was thought an excellent joke, he stood in silent moral astonishment. He
knew about as much of the revenue laws as the clerks did of Cicero and
Pliny; but his sturdy principles of integrity could not bend to any
of the arguments, founded on expediency, which were brought by his
companions in their own and their master's justification. He declared
that he must speak to his master upon the subject immediately. His
master was as busy as he could possibly be; and, when Forester insisted
upon seeing him, he desired that he would speak as quickly as he could,
for that he expected the supervisor every instant. Our hero declared,
that he could not, consistently with his principles, assist in evading
the laws of his country. The brewer stared, and then laughed; assured
him that he had as great a respect for the laws as other people; that he
did nothing but what every person in his situation was obliged to do in
their own defence. Forester resolutely persisted in his determination
against all clandestine practices. The brewer cut the matter short, by
saying, he had not time to argue; but that he did not choose to keep
a clerk who was not in his interests; that he supposed the next thing
would be, to betray him to his supervisor.

"I am no traitor!" exclaimed Forester; "I will not stay another instant
with a master who suspects me."

The brewer suffered him to depart without reluctance; but what
exasperated Forester the most was the composure of his friend Richardson
during this scene, who did not even offer to shake hands with him, when
he saw him going out of the house: for Richardson had a good place,
and did not choose to quarrel with his master, for a person whom he now
verily believed to be, as he had originally suspected, insane.

"This is the world!--this is friendship!" said Forester to himself.

His generous and enthusiastic imagination supplied him with eloquent
invectives against human nature, even while he ardently desired to serve
his fellow-creatures. He wandered through the streets of Edinburgh,
indulging himself alternately in misanthropic reflections and benevolent
projects. One instant, he resolved to study the laws, that he might
reform the revenue laws; the next moment, he recollected his own passion
for a desert island, and he regretted that he could not be shipwrecked
in Edinburgh.

The sound of a squeaking fiddle roused Forester from his reverie; he
looked up, and saw a thin, pale man fiddling to a set of dancing dogs,
that he was exhibiting upon the flags, for the amusement of a crowd
of men, women, and children. It was a deplorable spectacle; the dogs
appeared so wretched, in the midst of the merriment of the spectators,
that Forester's compassion was moved, and he exclaimed--

"Enough, enough!--They are quite tired; here are some halfpence!"

The showman took the halfpence; but several fresh spectators were yet to
see the sight; and though the exhausted animals were but little inclined
to perform their antic feats, their master twitched the rope, that was
fastened round their necks, so violently, that they were compelled to
renew their melancholy dance.

Forester darted forward, stopped the fiddler's hand, and began an
expostulation, not one word of which was understood by the person to
whom it was addressed. A stout lad, who was very impatient at this
interruption of his diversion, began to abuse Forester, and presently
from words he proceeded to blows.

Forester, though a better orator, was by no means so able a boxer as
his opponent. The battle was obstinately fought on both sides; but, at
length, our young Quixote received what has no name in heroic language,
but in the vulgar tongue is called a black eye; and, covered with blood
and bruises, he was carried by some humane passenger into a neighbouring
house. It was a printer and bookseller's shop. The bookseller treated
him with humanity; and, after advising him not to be so hastily engaged
to be the champion of dancing dogs, inquired who he was, and whether he
had any friends in Edinburgh, to whom he could send.

This printer, from having been accustomed to converse with a variety of
people, was a good judge of the language of gentlemen; and, though there
was nothing else in Forester's manners which could have betrayed him, he
spoke in such good language, that the bookseller was certain that he had
received a liberal education.

Our hero declined telling his history; but the printer was so well
pleased with his conversation, that he readily agreed to give him
employment; and, as soon as he recovered from his bruises, Forester was
eager to learn the art of printing.

"The art of printing," said he, "has emancipated mankind, and printers
ought to be considered as the most respectable benefactors of the human
race."

Always warm in his admiration of every new phantom that struck his
imagination, he was now persuaded that printers' devils were angels, and
that he should be supremely blessed in a printer's office.

"What employment so noble!" said he, as he first took the
composing-stick in his hand; "what employment so noble, as that of
disseminating knowledge over the universe!"

FORESTER, A PRINTER.

It was some time before our hero acquired dexterity in his new trade:
his companions formed, with amazing celerity, whole sentences, while he
was searching for letters, which perpetually dropped from his awkward
hands: but he was ashamed of his former versatility, and he resolved to
be steady to his present way of life. His situation, at this printer's,
was far better suited to him than that which he had quitted, with so
much disgust, at the brewer's. He rose early, and, by great industry,
overcame all the difficulties which at first so much alarmed him. He
soon became the most useful journeyman in the office. His diligence and
good behaviour recommended him to his master's employers. Whenever any
work was brought, Forester was sent for. This occasioned him to be much
in the shop, where he heard the conversation of many ingenious men who
frequented it; and he spent his evenings in reading. His understanding
had been of late uncultivated; but the fresh seeds that were now
profusely scattered upon the vigorous soil took root, and flourished.

Forester was just at that time of life when opinions are valued for
being _new_: he heard varieties of the most contradictory assertions in
morals, in science, in politics. It is a great advantage to a young
man to hear opposite arguments, to hear all that can be said upon every
subject.

Forester no longer obstinately adhered to the set of notions which he
had acquired from his education; he heard many, whom he could not
think his inferiors in abilities, debating questions which he formerly
imagined scarcely admitted of philosophic doubt. His mind became more
humble; but his confidence in his own powers, after having compared
himself with numbers, if less arrogant, was more secure and rational: he
no longer considered a man as a fool the moment he differed with him in
opinion; but he was still a little inclined to estimate the abilities of
authors by the party to which they belonged. This failing was increased,
rather than diminished, by the company which he now kept.

Amongst the young students who frequented Mr.----'s, the bookseller, was
Mr. Thomas ----, who, from his habit of _blurting_ out strange opinions
in conversation, acquired the name of Tom Random. His head was confused
between politics and poetry; his arguments were paradoxical, his diction
florid, and his gesture something between the spouting action of a
player, and the threatening action of a pugilist.

Forester was caught by the oratory of this genius from the first day he
heard him speak.

Tom Random asserted, that "this great globe, and all that it inhabits,"
must inevitably be doomed to destruction, unless certain ideas of
his own, in the government of the world, were immediately adopted by
universal acclamation.

It was not approbation, it was not esteem, which Forester felt for
his new friend it was for the first week blind, enthusiastic
admiration--every thing that he had seen or heard before appeared to
him trite and obsolete; every person who spoke temperate common sense
he heard with indifference or contempt; and all who were not zealots
in literature, or in politics, he considered as persons whose
understandings were so narrow, or whose hearts were so depraved, as to
render them "unfit to hear themselves convinced."

Those who read and converse have a double chance of correcting their
errors.

Forester most fortunately, about this time, happened to meet with a book
which in some degree counteracted the inflammatory effects of Random's
conversation, and which had a happy tendency to sober his enthusiasm,
without lessening his propensity to useful exertions: this book was the
Life of Dr. Franklin.

The idea that this great man began by being a _printer_ interested our
hero in his history; and whilst he followed him, step by step, through
his instructive narrative, Forester sympathized in his feelings, and
observed how necessary the smaller virtues of order, economy, industry,
and patience were to Franklin's great character and splendid success.
He began to hope that it would be possible to do good to his
fellow-creatures, without overturning all existing institutions.

About this time another fortunate coincidence happened in Forester's
education. One evening his friend, Tom Random, who was printing a
pamphlet, came, with a party of his companions, into Mr.----, the
bookseller's shop, enraged at the decision of a prize in a literary
society to which they belonged.

All the young partisans who surrounded Mr. Random loudly declared that
he had been treated with the most flagrant injustice; and the author
himself was too angry to affect any modesty upon the occasion.

"Would you believe it?" said he to Forester--"my essay has not been
thought worthy of the prize! The medal has been given to the most
wretched, tame, commonplace performance you ever saw. Every thing in
this world is done by corruption, by party, by secret influence!"

At every pause the irritated author wiped his forehead, and Forester
sympathized in his feelings.

In the midst of the author's exclamations, a messenger came with the
manuscript of the prize essay, and with the orders of the society
to have a certain number of copies printed off with all possible
expedition.

Random snatched up the manuscript, and, with all the fury of criticism,
began to read aloud some of the passages which he disliked.

Though it was marred in the reading, Forester could not agree with his
angry friend in condemning the performance. It appeared to him excellent
writing and excellent sense.

"Print it--print it then, as fast as you can--that is your
business--that's what you are paid for. Every one for himself," cried
Random, insolently throwing the manuscript at Forester; and, as he
flung out of the shop with his companions, he added, with a contemptuous
laugh, "A printer's devil setting up for a critic! He may be a capital
judge of pica and brevier, perhaps--but let not the compositor go beyond
his stick."

"Is this the man," said Forester, "whom I have heard so eloquent in the
praise of candour and liberality? Is this the man who talks of universal
toleration and freedom of opinion, and who yet cannot bear that any one
should differ from him in criticising a sentence? Is this the man who
would have equality amongst all his fellow-creatures, and who calls
a compositor a printer's devil? Is this the man who cants about the
_pre-eminence of mind_ and the _perfections of intellect_, and yet now
takes advantage of his rank, of his _supporters_, of the cry of his
partisans, to bear down the voice of reason?--'Let not the compositor go
beyond his composing-stick!'--And why not? Why should not he be a
judge of writing?" At this reflection, Forester eagerly took up the
manuscript, which had been flung at his feet. All his indignant feelings
instantly changed into delightful exultation--he saw the hand--he read
the name of Henry Campbell. The title of the manuscript was, "_An Essay
on the best Method of reforming Abuses_." This was the subject proposed
by the society; and Henry had written upon the question with so much
moderation, and yet with such unequivocal decision had shown himself the
friend of rational liberty, that all the members of the society who were
not borne away by their prejudices were unanimous in their preference of
this performance.

Random's declamation only inflamed the minds of his own partisans. Good
judges of writing exclaimed, as they read it, "This is all very fine;
but what would this man be at? His violence hurts the cause he wishes to
support."

Forester read Henry Campbell's essay with all the avidity of friendship;
he read it again and again--his generous soul was incapable of envy; and
whilst he admired, he was convinced by the force of reason.

His master desired that he would set about the essay early in the
morning; but his eagerness for his friend Henry's fame was such, that he
sat up above half the night hard at work at it. He was indefatigable the
next day at the business; and as all hands were employed on the essay,
it was finished that evening.

Forester rubbed his hands with delight, when he had set the name of
Henry Campbell in the title-page--but an instant afterwards he sighed
bitterly.

"I am only a printer," said he to himself. "These just arguments, these
noble ideas, will instruct and charm hundreds of my fellow-creatures: no
one will ever ask, 'Who set the types?'"

His reflections were interrupted by the entrance of Tom Random and two
of his partisans: he was extremely displeased to find that the printers
had not been going on with his pamphlet; his personal disappointments
seemed to increase the acrimony of his zeal for the public good:
he declaimed upon politics--upon the necessity for the immediate
publication of his sentiments, for the salvation of the state. His
action was suited to his words: violent and blind to consequences,
with one sudden kick, designed to express his contempt for the opposite
party, this political Alnaschar unfortunately overturned the form which
contained the types for the newspaper of the next day, which was
just going to the press--a newspaper in which he had written splendid
paragraphs.

Forester, happily for his philosophy, recollected the account which
Franklin, in his history of his own life, gives of the patience with
which he once bore a similar accident. The printers, with secret
imprecations against oratory, or at least against those orators who
think that action is every thing, set to work again to repair the
mischief.

Forester, much fatigued, at length congratulated himself upon having
finished his hard day's work, when a man from the shop came to inquire
whether three hundred cards, which had been ordered the week before to
be printed off, were finished. The man to whom the order was given had
forgotten it, and he was going home: he decidedly answered, "No; the
cards can't be done till to-morrow: we have left work for this night,
thank God."

"The gentleman says he must have them," expostulated the messenger.

"He _must_ not, he cannot have them. I would not print a card for his
majesty at this time of night," replied the sullen workman, throwing his
hat upon his head, in token of departure.

"What are these cards?" said Forester.

"Only a dancing-master's cards for his ball," said the printer's
journeyman. "I'll not work beyond my time for any dancing-master that
wears a head."

The messenger then said, that he was desired to ask for the manuscript
card.

This card was hunted for all over the room; and, at last, Forester found
it under a heap of refuse papers: his eye was caught with the name
of his old friend, Monsieur Pasgrave, the dancing-master, whom he had
formerly frightened by the skeleton with the fiery eyes.

"I will print the cards for him myself; I am not at all tired," cried
Forester, who was determined to make some little amends for the injury
which he had formerly done to the poor dancing-master. He resolved to
print the cards for nothing, and he stayed up very late to finish them.
His companions all left him, for they were in a great hurry to see, what
in Edinburgh is a rare sight, the town illuminated.

These illuminations were upon account of some great naval victory.

Forester, steady to Monsieur Pasgrave's cards, did what no other workman
would have done; he finished for him, on this night of public joy, his
three hundred cards. Every now and then, as he was quietly at work,
he heard the loud huzzas in the street: his waning candle sunk in the
socket, as he had just packed up his work.

By the direction at the bottom of the cards, he learned where M.
Pasgrave lodged, and, as he was going out to look at the illuminations,
he resolved to leave them himself at the dancing-master's house.

THE ILLUMINATIONS.

The illuminations were really beautiful. He went up to the Castle,
whence he saw a great part of the Old Town, and all Prince's-street,
lighted up in the most splendid manner. He crossed the Earth-mound into
Prince's-street. Walking down Prince's-street, he saw a crowd of people
gathered before the large illuminated window of a confectioner's shop.
As he approached nearer, he distinctly heard the voice of Tom Random,
who was haranguing the mob. The device and motto which the confectioner
displayed in his window displeased this gentleman, who, beside his
public-spirited abhorrence of all men of a party opposite to his own,
had likewise private cause of dislike to this confectioner, who had
refused him his daughter in marriage.

It was part of Random's new system of political justice to revenge his
own quarrels.

The mob, who are continually, without knowing it, made the instruments
of private malice, when they think they are acting in a public cause,
readily joined in Tom Random's cry of "Down with the motto! Down with
the motto!"

Forester, who, by his lesson from the dancing dogs, had learned a little
prudence, and who had just printed Henry Campbell's Essay on the best
Means of reforming Abuses, did not mix with the rabble, but joined in
the entreaties of some peaceable passengers, who prayed that the poor
man's windows might be spared. The windows were, notwithstanding,
demolished with a terrible crash, and the crowd, then alarmed at the
mischief they had done, began to disperse. The constables, who had been
sent for, appeared. Tom Random was taken into custody. Forester was
pursuing his way to the dancing-master's, when one of the officers of
justice exclaimed, "Stop!--stop him!--he's one of 'em: he's a great
friend of Mr. Random: I've seen him often parading arm in arm in
High-street with him."

This, alas! was too true: the constables seized Forester, and put
him, with Tom Random, and the ringleader of the riot, into a place of
confinement for the night.

Poor Forester, who was punished for the faults of his former friend and
present enemy, had, during this long night, leisure for much wholesome
reflection upon the danger of forming imprudent intimacies. He resolved
never to walk again in High-street arm in arm with such a man as Tom
Random.

The constables were rather hasty in the conclusion they drew from this
presumptive evidence.

Our hero, who felt the disgrace of his situation, was not a little
astonished at Tom Random's consoling himself with drinking instead
of philosophy. The sight of this enthusiast, when he had completely
intoxicated himself, was a disgusting but useful spectacle to our
indignant hero. Forester was shocked at the union of gross vice and
rigid pretensions to virtue: he could scarcely believe that the reeling,
stammering idiot whom he now beheld was the same being from whose lips
he had heard declamations upon the _omnipotence of intellect_--from
whose pen he had seen projects for the government of empires.

The dancing-master, who, in the midst of the illuminations, had
regretted that his cards could not be printed, went early in the morning
to inquire about them at the printer's.

The printer had learnt that one of his boys was taken up amongst the
rioters: he was sorry to find that Forester had gotten himself into such
a scrape: but he was a very cautious snug man, and he did not choose to
interfere: he left him quietly to be dealt with according to law.

The dancing-master, however, was interested in finding him out, because
he was informed that Forester had sat up almost all night to print his
cards, and that he had them now in his pocket.

M. Pasgrave at length gained admittance to him in his confinement:
the officers of justice were taking him and Random before Mr. W----, a
magistrate, with whom informations had been lodged by the confectioner,
who had suffered in his windows.

Pasgrave, when he beheld Forester, was surprised to such a degree, that
he could scarcely finish his bow, or express his astonishment, either in
French or English. "Eh, monsieur! mon Dieu! bon Dieu! I beg ten million
pardons--I am come to search for a printer who has my cards in his
pocket."

"Here are your cards," said Forester: "let me speak a few words to
you." He took M. Pasgrave aside. "I perceive," said he, "that you have
discovered who I am. Though in the service of a printer, I have still as
much the feelings and principles of a gentleman as I had when you saw me
in Dr. Campbell's house. I have particular reasons for being anxious
to remain undiscovered by Dr. Campbell, or any of his family: you may
depend upon it that my reasons are not dishonourable. I request that you
will not, upon any account, betray me to that family. I am going before
a magistrate, and am accused of being concerned in a riot, which I did
every thing in my power to prevent."

"Ah! monsieur," interrupted the dancing-master, "but you see de grand
inconvenience of concealing your _rank_ and name. You, who are comme il
faut, are confounded with the mob: permit me at least to follow you to
Mr. W----, the magistrate: I have de honneur to teach les demoiselles
his daughters to dance; dey are to be at my ball--dey take one half
dozen tickets. I must call dere wid my cards; and I shall, if you will
give me leave, accompany you now, and mention dat I know you to be
un homme comme il faut, above being guilty of an unbecoming action. I
flatter myself I have some interest wid de ladies of de family, and dat
dey will do me de favour to speak to monsieur leur cher père sur votre
compte."

Forester thanked the good-natured dancing-master, but he proudly said,
that he should trust to his own innocence for his defence.

M. Pasgrave, who had seen something more of the world than our hero, and
who was interested for him, because he had once made him a present of an
excellent violin, and because he had sat up half the night to print the
ball cards, resolved not to leave him entirely to his innocence for a
defence: he followed Forester to Mr. W----'s. The magistrate was a slow,
pompous man, by no means a good physiognomist, much less a good judge of
character. He was proud of his authority, and glad to display the
small portion of legal knowledge which he possessed. As soon as he
was informed that some young men were brought before him, who had been
engaged the preceding night in a _riot_, he put on all his magisterial
terrors, and assured the confectioner, who had a private audience
of him, that he should have justice, and that the person or persons
concerned in breaking his window or windows should be punished with the
utmost severity that the law would allow. Contrary to the humane spirit
of the British law, which supposes every man to be innocent till it is
proved that he is guilty, this harsh magistrate presumed that every man
who was brought before him was guilty till he was proved to be innocent.
Forester's appearance was not in his favour: he had been up all night;
his hair was dishevelled; his linen was neither fine nor white; his
shoes were thick-soled and dirty; his coat was that in which he had been
at work at the printer's the preceding day; it was in several places
daubed with printers' ink; and his unwashed hands bespoke his trade. Of
all these circumstances the slow circumspect eye of the magistrate took
cognizance one by one. Forester observed the effect which this survey
produced upon his judge; and he felt that appearances were against
him, and that appearances are sometimes of consequence. After having
estimated his poverty by these external symptoms, the magistrate looked,
for the first time, in his face, and pronounced that he had one of the
worst countenances he ever beheld. This judgment once pronounced, he
proceeded to justify, by wresting to the prisoner's disadvantage every
circumstance that appeared. Forester's having been frequently seen
in Tom Random's company was certainly against him: the confectioner
perpetually repeated that they were constant companions; that they were
intimate friends; that they were continually walking together every
Sunday; and that they often had come arm in arm into his shop, talking
politics; that he believed Forester to be of the same way of thinking
with Mr. Random; and that he saw him close behind him, at the moment the
stones were thrown that broke the windows. It appeared that Mr. Random
was at that time active in encouraging the mob. To oppose the angry
confectioner's conjectural evidence, the lad who threw the stone, and
who was now produced, declared that Forester held back his arm, and
said, "My good lad, don't break this man's windows: go home quietly;
here's a shilling for you." The person who gave this honest testimony,
in whom there was a strange mixture of the love of mischief and the
spirit of generosity, was the very lad who fought with Forester, and
beat him, about the dancing dogs. He whispered to Forester, "Do you
remember me? I hope you don't bear malice." The magistrate, who heard
this whisper, immediately construed it to the prisoner's disadvantage.
"Then, sir," said he, addressing himself to our hero, "this gentleman,
I understand, claims acquaintance with you; his acquaintance really
does you honour, and speaks, strongly in favour of your character. If
I mistake not, this is the lad whom I sent to the Tolbooth, some little
time ago, for a misdemeanour; and he is not, I apprehend, a stranger to
the stocks."

Forester commanded his temper as well as he was able, and observed, that
whatever might be the character of the young man who had spoken in his
favour, his evidence would, perhaps, be thought to deserve some credit,
when the circumstances of his acquaintance with the witness were known.
He then related the adventure of the dancing dogs, and remarked, that
the testimony of an enemy came with double force in his favour. The
language and manner in which Forester spoke surprised all who were
present; but the history of the dancing dogs appeared so ludicrous and
so improbable, that the magistrate decidedly pronounced it to be "a
fabrication, a story invented to conceal the palpable collusion of the
witnesses." Yet, though he one moment declared that he did not believe
the story, he the next inferred from it, that Forester was disposed to
riot and sedition, since he was ready to fight with a vagabond in the
streets for the sake of a parcel of dancing dogs.

M. Pasgrave, in the meantime, had, with great good-nature, been
representing Forester in the best light he possibly could to the young
ladies, the magistrate's daughters. One of them sent to beg to speak
to their father. M. Pasgrave judiciously dwelt upon his assurances of
Forester's being a gentleman: he told Mr. W---- that he had met him in
one of the best families in Edinburgh; that he knew he had some private
reasons for concealing that he was a gentleman: "perhaps the young
gentleman was reduced to temporary distress," he said; but whatever
might be these reasons, M. Pasgrave vouched for his having very
respectable friends and connexions. The magistrate wished to know the
family in which M. Pasgrave had met Forester; but he was, according
to his promise, impenetrable on this subject. His representations had,
however, the desired effect upon Mr. W----: when he returned to the
examination of our hero, his opinion of his countenance somewhat varied;
he despatched his other business; bailed Tom Random on high sureties;
and, when Forester was the only person that remained, he turned to him
with great solemnity; bade him sit down; informed him that he knew him
to be a gentleman; that he was greatly concerned that a person like him,
who had respectable friends and connexions, should involve himself in
such a disagreeable affair; that it was a matter of grief and surprise
to him, to see a young gentleman in such apparel; that he earnestly
recommended to him to accommodate matters with his friends; and, above
all things, to avoid the company of seditious persons. Much good advice,
but in a dictatorial tone, and in cold, pompous language, he bestowed
upon the prisoner, and at length dismissed him. "How different," said
Forester to himself, "is this man's method of giving advice from Dr.
Campbell's!"

This lesson strongly impressed, however, upon our hero's mind the
belief, that external appearance, dress, manners, and the company we
keep, are the usual circumstances by which the world judge of character
and conduct. When he was dismissed from Mr. W----'s august presence,
the first thing he did was to inquire for Pasgrave: he was giving the
magistrate's daughters a lesson, and could not be interrupted; but
Forester left a note for him, requesting to see him at ten o'clock the
next day, at Mr. ----, the bookseller's. New mortifications awaited our
hero: on his return to his master's, he was very coldly received; Mr.
---- let him know, in unqualified terms, that he did not like to
employ any one in his work who got into quarrels at night in the public
streets. Forester's former favour with his master, his industry and
talents, were not considered without envy by the rest of the journeymen
printers; and they took advantage of his absence to misrepresent him to
the bookseller: however, when Forester came to relate his own story,
his master was convinced that he was not to blame; that he had worked
extremely hard the preceding day; and that, far from having been
concerned in a riot, he had done every thing in his power to prevent
mischief. He desired to see the essay, which was printed with so much
expedition: it was in the hands of the corrector of the press. The
sheets were sent for, and the bookseller was in admiration at the
extraordinary correctness with which it was printed; the corrector of
the press scarcely had occasion to alter a word, a letter, or a stop.
There was a quotation in the manuscript from Juvenal. Henry Campbell
had, by mistake, omitted to name the satire and line, and the author
from which it was taken, though he had left a blank in which they were
to be inserted. The corrector of the press, though a literary gentleman,
was at a stand. Forester immediately knew where to look for the passage
in the original author: he found it, and inserted the book and line in
their proper place. His master did not suffer this to pass unobserved;
he hinted to him, that it was a pity a young man of his abilities
and knowledge should waste his time in the mere technical drudgery of
printing. "I should be glad now," continued the bookseller, "to employ
you as a corrector of the press, and to advance you, according to your
merits, in the world; _but_," glancing his eye at Forester's dress, "you
must give me leave to say, that some attention to outward appearance
is necessary in our business. Gentlemen call here, as you well know,
continually, and I like to have the people about me make a creditable
appearance. You have earned money since you have been with me--surely
you can afford yourself a decent suit of clothes and a cleaner shirt. I
beg your pardon for speaking so freely; but I really have a regard for
you, and wish to see you get forward in life."

FORESTER, A CORRECTOR OF THE PRESS.

Forester had not, since he left Dr. Campbell's, been often spoken to
in a tone of friendship. The bookseller's well-meant frank remonstrance
made its just impression; and he resolved to make the necessary
additions to his wardrobe; nay, he even went to a hair-dresser, to
have his hair cut and brought into decent order. His companions, the
printers, had not been sparing in their remarks upon the meanness of
his former apparel, and Forester pleased himself with anticipating
the respect they would feel for him, when he should appear in better
clothes. "Can such trifles," said he to himself, "make such a change
in the opinion of my fellow-creatures? And why should I fight with the
world for trifles? My real merit is neither increased nor diminished by
the dress I may happen to wear; but I see, that unless I waste all my
life in combating the prejudices of superficial observers, I should
avoid all those pecuiliarities in my external appearance which prevent
whatever good qualities I have from obtaining their just respect." He
was surprised at the blindness of his companions, who could not discover
his merit through the roughness of his manners and the disadvantages
of his dress; but he determined to shine out upon them in the superior
dress and character of a corrector of the press. He went to a tailor's,
and bespoke a suit of clothes. He bought new linen; and our readers
will perhaps hear with surprise, that he actually began to consider very
seriously whether he should not take a few lessons in dancing. He had
learned to dance formerly, and was not naturally either inactive or
awkward: but his contempt for the art prevented him, for some years,
from practising it; and he had nearly forgotten his wonted agility.
Henry Campbell once, when Forester was declaiming against dancing,
told him, that if he had learned to dance, and excelled in the art, his
contempt for the trifling accomplishment would have more effect upon the
minds of others, because it could not be mistaken for envy. This remark
made a deep impression upon our hero, especially as he observed that his
friend Henry was not in the least vain of his personal graces, and
had cultivated his understanding, though he could dance a Scotch reel.
Scotch reels were associated in Forester's imagination with Flora
Campbell; and in balancing the arguments for and against learning to
dance, the recollection of Archibald Mackenzie's triumphant look, when
he led her away as his partner at the famous ball, had more influence
perhaps upon Forester's mind than his pride and philosophy apprehended.
He began to have some confused design of returning, at some distant
period, to his friends; and he had hopes that he should appear in a
more amiable light to Flora, after he had perfected himself in an
accomplishment which he fancied she admired prodigiously. His esteem for
that lady was rather diminished by this belief; but still a sufficient
quantity remained to excite in him a strong ambition to please. The
agony he felt the night he left the ball-room was such, that he could
not even now recollect the circumstances without confusion and anguish
of mind. His hands were now such as could appear without gloves; and he
resolved to commence the education of his feet.

M. Pasgrave called upon him, in consequence of the message which he
left at the magistrate's: his original design in sending for the
dancing-master was to offer him some acknowledgment for his obliging
conduct. "M. Pasgrave," said he, "you have behaved towards me like a
man of honour; you have kept my secret; I am convinced that you will
continue to keep it inviolate." As he spoke, he produced a ten-guinea
bank-note, for at length he had prevailed upon himself to have recourse
to his pocket-book, which, till this day, had remained unopened.
Pasgrave stared at the sight of the note, and withdrew his hand at
first, when it was offered; but he yielded at length, when Forester
assured him that he was not in any distress, and that he could perfectly
well afford to indulge his feelings of gratitude. "Nay," continued
Forester, who, if he had not always practised the maxims of politeness,
notwithstanding possessed that generosity of mind and good sense
on which real politeness must depend--"you shall not be under any
obligation to me, M. Pasgrave: I am just going to ask a favour from you.
You must teach me to dance." "Wid de utmost pleasure," exclaimed the
delighted dancing-master; and the hours of his attendance were soon
settled. Whatever Forester attempted, he pursued with energy. M.
Pasgrave, after giving him a few lessons, prophesied that he would do
him infinite credit; and Forester felt a secret pride in the idea
that he should surprise his friends, some time or other, with his new
accomplishment.

He continued in the bookseller's service, correcting the press for him,
much to his satisfaction; and the change in his personal appearance
pleased his master, as it showed attention to his advice. Our hero, from
time to time, exercised his talents in writing; and, as he inserted his
compositions under a fictitious signature, in his master's newspaper,
he had an opportunity of hearing the most unprejudiced opinions of a
variety of critics, who often came to read the papers at their house.
He stated, in short essays, some of those arguments concerning the
advantages and disadvantages of politeness, luxury, the love of society,
misanthropy, &c., which had formerly passed between him and Henry
Campbell; and he listened to the remarks that were made upon each side
of the question. How it happened, we know not; but after he had taken
lessons for about six weeks from M. Pasgrave, he became extremely
solicitous to have a solution of all his Stoical doubts, and to furnish
himself with the best possible arguments in favour of civilized society.
He could not bear the idea that he yielded his opinions to any thing
less than strict demonstration: he drew up a list of queries,
which concluded with the following question:--"What should be the
distinguishing characteristics of the higher classes of people in
society?" This query was answered in one of the public papers, a few
days after it appeared in Mr. ----'s paper, and the answer was signed
_H.C., a Friend to Society_. Even without these initials, Forester would
easily have discovered it to be Henry Campbell's writing; and several
strokes seemed to be so particularly addressed to him, that he could not
avoid thinking Henry had discovered the querist. The impression which
arguments make upon the mind varies with time and change of situation.
Those arguments in favour of subordination in society, in favour of
agreeable manners, and attention to the feelings of others in the small
as well as in the great concerns of life, which our hero had heard with
indifference from Dr. Campbell and Henry in conversation, struck him,
when he saw them in a printed essay, with all the force of conviction;
and he wondered how it had happened that he never before perceived them
to be conclusive.

He put the newspaper, which contained this essay, in his pocket; and,
after he had finished his day's work, and had taken his evening lesson
from M. Pasgrave, he went out with an intention of going to a favourite
spot upon Arthur's Seat, to read the essay again at his leisure.

But he was stopped at the turn from the North Bridge, into High-street,
by a scavenger's cart. The scavenger, with his broom which had just
swept the High-street, was clearing away a heap of mud. Two gentlemen
on horseback, who were riding like postilions, came up during this
operation--Sir Philip Gosling and Archibald Mackenzie. Forester had his
back towards them, and he never looked round, because he was too intent
upon his own thoughts. Archibald was mounted upon Sawney, the horse
which he had so _fairly_ won from his friend Sir Philip. The half-guinea
which had been promised to the hostler had not yet been paid; and the
hostler, determined to revenge himself upon Archibald, invented an
ingenious method of gratifying his resentment. He taught Sawney to rear
and plunge whenever his legs were touched by the broom with which the
stables were swept. When Sawney was perfectly well trained to this
trick, the cunning hostler communicated his design, and related his
cause of complaint against Archibald, to a scavenger, who was well
known at the livery stables. The scavenger entered into his friend the
hostler's feeling, and promised to use his broom in his cause,
whenever a convenient and public opportunity should offer. The hour of
retribution was now arrived: the scavenger saw his young gentleman in
full glory, mounted upon Sawney; he kept his eye upon him, whilst, in
company with the baronet, he came over the North Bridge: there was a
stop, from the meeting of carts and carriages. The instant Archibald
came within reach of the broom, the scavenger slightly touched Sawney's
legs; Sawney plunged and reared, and reared and plunged. The scavenger
stood grinning at the sight. Forester attempted to seize the horse's
bridle; but Sawney, who seemed determined upon the point, succeeded.
When Forester snatched at his bridle, he reared, then plunged; and
Archibald Mackenzie was fairly lodged in the scavenger's cart. Whilst
the well-dressed laird floundered in the mud, Forester gave the horse
to the servant, who had now ridden up; and, satisfied that Mackenzie had
received no material injury, inquired no further. He turned to assist a
poor washerwoman, who was lifting a large basket of clean linen into her
house, to get it out of the way of the cart. As soon as he had helped
her to lift the basket into her passage, he was retiring, when he heard
a voice at the back-door, which was at the other end of the passage. It
was the voice of a child; and he listened, for he thought he had heard
it before. "The door is locked," said the washerwoman. "I know who it is
that is knocking; it is only a little girl who is coming for a cap which
I have there in the basket." The door was unlocked, and Forester saw the
little girl to whom the fine geranium belonged. What a number of ideas
she recalled to his mind! She looked at him, and hesitated, courtesied,
then turned away, as if she was afraid she was mistaken, and asked the
washerwoman if she had plaited her grandmother's cap. The woman searched
in her basket, and produced the cap nicely plaited. The little girl, in
the meantime, considered Forester with anxious attention. "I believe,"
said she, timidly, "you are, or you are very like, the gentleman who was
so good as to--" "Yes," interrupted Forester, "I know what you mean.
I am the man who went with you to try to obtain justice from your
tyrannical schoolmistress: I did not do you any good. Have you
seen--have you heard any thing of--?" Such a variety of recollections
pressed upon Forester's heart, that he could not pronounce the name of
Henry Campbell; and he changed his question. "Is your old grandmother
recovered?"

"She is quite well, thank you, sir; and she is grown young again, since
you saw her: perhaps you don't know how good Mr. Henry and the young
lady have been to us. We don't live now in that little, close, dark room
at the watchmaker's. We are as happy, sir, as the day is long." "But
what of Henry? what of--?" "Oh, sir! but if you are not very busy, or in
a great hurry--it is but a little way off--if you _could_ come and look
at our new house--I don't mean _our_ house, for it is not ours; but
we take care of it, and we have two little rooms to ourselves; and Mr.
Henry and Miss Flora very often come to see us. I wish you could come to
see how nice our rooms are! The house is not far off, only at the back
of the Meadows." "Go, show me the way--I'll follow you," said Forester,
after he had satisfied himself that there was no danger of his meeting
any of Dr. Campbell's family.

THE MEADOWS.

Our hero accompanied the little girl with eager, benevolent curiosity.
"There," said she, when they came to the Meadows, "do you see that white
house, with the paling before it?" "But that cannot be your house!" "No,
no, sir: Dr. Campbell and several gentlemen have the large room,
and they come there twice a-week to teach something to a great many
children. Grandmother can explain all that better to you, sir, than I
can; but all I know is, that it is our business to keep the room aired
and swept, and to take care of the glass things which you'll see; and
you shall see how clean it is: it was _I_ swept it this morning."

They had now reached the gate which was in the paling before the
house. The old woman came to the door, clean, neat, and cheerful; she
recollected to have seen Forester in company with Henry Campbell at the
watchmaker's; and this was sufficient to make him a welcome guest. "God
bless the family, and all that belongs to them, for ever and ever!" said
the woman. "This way, sir." "Oh, don't look into our little rooms yet:
look at the great room first, if you please, sir," said the child.

There was a large table in the middle of this long room, and several
glass retorts, and other chemical vessels, were ranged upon shelves;
wooden benches were placed on each side of the table. The grandmother,
to whom the little girl had referred for a clear explanation, could
not, however, tell Forester very exactly the use of the retorts; but she
informed him that many of the manufacturers in Edinburgh sent their sons
hither twice a-week; and Dr. Campbell, and Mr. Henry Campbell, and some
other gentlemen, came by turns to instruct them. Forester recollected
now that he once heard Henry talking to his father about a scheme for
teaching the children of the manufacturers of Edinburgh some knowledge
of chemistry, such as they might afterwards apply advantageously to the
arts and every-day business of life.

"I have formed projects, but what good have I ever actually done to my
fellow-creatures?" said Forester to himself. With melancholy steps he
walked to examine every thing in the room. "Dr. Campbell sits in this
arm-chair, does not he? And where does Henry sit?" The old woman placed
the chairs for him as they usually were placed. Upon one of the shelves
there was a slate, which, as it had been written upon, the little girl
had put by very carefully; there were some calculations upon the weight
of different gases, and the figures Forester knew to be Henry's: he
looked at every thing that was Henry's with pleasure. "Because I used to
be so rough in my manner to him," said Forester to himself, "I dare say
that he thinks I have no feeling, and I suppose he has forgotten me by
this time: I deserve, indeed, to be forgotten by every body! How could
I leave such friends!" On the other side of the slate poor Forester saw
his own name written several times over, in his friend's hand-writing,
and he read two lines of his own poetry, which he remembered to have
repeated to Henry the day that they walked to Arthur's Seat. Forester
felt much pleasure from this little proof of his friend's affection.
"Now won't you look at our nice rooms?" said the child, who had waited
with some patience till he had done pondering upon the slate.

The little rooms were well arranged, and their neatness was not now as
much lost upon our hero as it would have been some time before. The old
woman and her grand-daughter, with all the pride of gratitude, exhibited
to him several little presents of furniture which they had received
from Dr. Campbell's family. "Mr. Henry gave me this! Miss Flora gave me
that!" was frequently repeated. The little girl opened the door of her
own room. On a clean white deal bracket, which "_Mr. Henry lad put
up with his own hands_," stood the well-known geranium in its painted
flower-pot. Forester saw nothing else in the room, and it was in vain
that both the old woman and her grand-daughter talked to him at once;
he heard not a word that was said to him. The flowers were all gone, and
the brown calyces of the geranium flowers reminded him of the length of
time which had elapsed since he had first seen them. "I am sorry there
are no flowers to offer you," said the little girl, observing Forester's
melancholy look; "but I thought you did not like geraniums; for I
remember when I gave you a fine flower in the watchmaker's shop you
pulled it to pieces, and threw it on the ground." "I should not do so
now," said Forester. The black marks on the painted flower-pot had been
entirely effaced: be turned away, endeavoured to conceal his emotion,
and took leave of the place as soon as the grateful inhabitants would
suffer him to depart. The reflection that he had wasted his time,
that he had never done any good to any human being, that he had lost
opportunities of making both himself and others happy, pressed upon his
mind; but his Stoical pride still resisted the thought of returning
to Dr. Campbell's. "It will be imagined that I yield my opinions from
meanness of spirit," said he to himself. "Dr. Campbell certainly has
no further regard or esteem for me; neither he nor Henry have troubled
themselves about my fate: they are doing good to more deserving objects;
they are intent upon literary pursuits, and have not time to bestow a
thought upon me. And Flora, I suppose, is as gay as she is good. I alone
am unhappy,--a wanderer,--an outcast,--a useless being."

Forester, whilst he was looking at the geranium, or soon afterwards,
missed his handkerchief; the old woman and her grand-daughter searched
for it all over the house, but in vain: he then thought he must have
left it at the washerwoman's, where he met the little girl; he called to
inquire for it, upon his return to Edinburgh. When he returned to this
woman's house for his handkerchief, he found her sitting upon a low
stool, in her laundry, weeping bitterly; her children stood round her.
Forester inquired into the cause of her distress, and she told him that
a few minutes after he left her, the young gentleman who had been thrown
from his horse into the scavenger's cart was brought into her house,
whilst his servant went home for another suit of clothes for him. "I
did not at first guess that I had ever seen the young gentleman before,"
continued she; "but when the mud was cleared from his face I knew him to
be Mr. Archibald Mackenzie. I am sure I wish I had never seen his face
then or at any time. He was in a very bad humour after his tumble, and
he began again to threaten me about a ten-guinea bank-note, which he and
his servant declare they sent in his waistcoat pocket to be washed: I'm
sure I never saw it. Mr. Henry Campbell quieted him about it for awhile;
but just now he began again with me, and he says he has spoken to a
lawyer, and that he will make me pay the whole note; and he swore at me
as if I had been the worst creature in the world; and, God knows, I work
hard for my children, and never wronged any one in my days!"

Forester, who forgot all his own melancholy reflections as soon as he
could assist any one who was in distress, bade the poor woman dry
her tears, and assured her that she had nothing to fear; for he would
instantly go to Dr. Campbell, and get him to speak to Mackenzie. "If
it is necessary," said he, "I'll pay the money myself." She clasped
her hands joyfully as he spoke, and all her children joined in an
exclamation of delight. "I'll go to Dr. Campbell's this instant," said
our hero, whose pride now yielded to the desire of doing justice to this
injured woman; he totally forgot himself, and thought only of her: "I'll
go to Dr. Campbell's, and I will speak to Mr. Mackenzie immediately."

A SUMMONS

Whilst Forester was walking through the streets, with that energy which
the hope of serving his fellow-creatures always excited in his generous
mind, he even forgot a scheme which he had, in spite of his Stoical
pride and his dread of being thought to give up his opinions from
meanness, resolved in his imagination. He had formed the design of
returning to his friends an altered being in his external appearance: he
had ordered a fashionable suit of clothes, which were now ready. He had
laid aside the dress and manners of a gentleman from the opinion that
they were degrading to the character of a man: as soon as this prejudice
had been conquered, he began to think he might resume them. Many were
the pleasing anticipations in which he indulged himself: the looks of
each of his friends, the generous approving eye of Henry, the benevolent
countenance of Dr. Campbell, the arch smile of Flora, were all painted
by his fancy; and he invented every circumstance that was likely to
happen--every word that would probably be said by each individual. We
are sure that our readers will give our enthusiastic hero credit for
his forgetting these pleasing reveries--for his forgetting himself,
nay, even Flora Campbell--when humanity and justice called upon him for
exertion.

When he found himself in George's-square, within sight of Dr. Campbell's
house, his heart beat violently, and he suddenly stopped to
recollect himself. He had scarcely stood a few instants, when a hard,
stout-looking man came up to him, and asked him if his name were
Forester: he started, and answered, "Yes, sir, what is your business
with me?" The stranger replied by producing a paper, and desiring him
to read it. The paper, which was half printed, half written, began with
these words:--"You are hereby required to appear before me--"

"What is all this?" exclaimed our hero. "It is a summons," replied the
stranger: "I am a constable, and you will please to come with me before
Mr. W----. This is not the first time you have been before him, I am
told." To this last insolent taunt Forester made no reply, but in a firm
tone said that he was conscious of no crime, but that he was ready
to follow the constable, and to appear before Mr. W----, or any other
magistrate, who wished to inquire into his conduct. Though he summoned
all his fortitude, and spoke with composure, he was much astonished by
this proceeding; he could not help reflecting, that an individual in
society who has friends, an established character, and a _home_, is in
a more desirable situation than an unconnected being, who has no one
to answer for his conduct,--no one to rejoice in his success, or to
sympathize in his misfortunes. "Ah, Dr. Campbell! happy father! in the
midst of your own family, you have forgotten your imprudent ward!" said
Forester to himself, while his mind revolted from seeking his friend's
assistance in this discreditable situation. "You do not know how near he
is to you! you do not know that he was just returning to you! you do not
see that he is, at this moment, perhaps, on the brink of disgrace!"

THE BANK-NOTES.

Forester was mistaken in his idea that Dr. Campbell had forgotten him;
but we shall not yet explain further upon this subject; we only throw
out this hint, that our readers may not totally change their good
opinion of the doctor. We must now beg their attention to the
continuation of the history of Archibald Mackenzie's bank-note.

Lady Catherine Mackenzie one day observed that the colours were changed
in one spot on the right-hand pocket of her son's waistcoat. "My dear
Archibald," said she, "what has happened to your smart waistcoat? What
is that terrible spot?" "Really, ma'am, I don't know," said Archibald,
with his usual soft voice and deceitful smile. Henry Campbell observed
that it seemed as if the colours had been discharged by some acid. "Did
you wear that waistcoat, Mr. Mackenzie," said he, "the night the large
bottle of vitriolic acid was broken--the night that poor Forester's cat
was killed: don't you remember?" "Oh, I did not at first recollect; I
cannot possibly remember, indeed,--it is so long ago,--what waistcoat I
wore on that particular night." The extreme embarrassment in Archibald's
manner surprised Henry. "I really don't perceive your _drift_,"
continued Mackenzie: "what made you ask the question so earnestly?" He
was relieved when Henry answered, that he only wished to know whether
it was probable that it was stained with vitriolic acid; "because,"
said he, "I think _that_ is the pocket in which you said you left
your ten-guinea note; then, perhaps, the note may have been stained."
"Perhaps so," replied Mackenzie dryly. "And if it were, you could
identify the note: you have forgotten the number; but if the note has
been stained with vitriolic acid, we should certainly be able to know
it again: the acid would have changed the colour of the ink." Mackenzie
eagerly seized this idea; and immediately, in pursuance of Henry's
advice, went to several of the principal bankers in Edinburgh, and
requested that if a note, stained in such a manner, should be presented
to them, they would stop payment of it till Mackenzie should examine it.
Some time elapsed, and nothing was heard of the note. Mackenzie gave up
all hopes of recovering it; and in proportion as these hopes diminished,
his old desire of making the poor washerwoman answerable for his loss
increased. We have just heard this woman's account of his behaviour to
her, when he came into her house to be refitted, after his tumble from
Sawney into the scavenger's cart. All his promises to Henry he
thought proper to disregard: promises appeared to him mere matters of
convenience; and the idea of "_taking in_" such a young man as Henry
Campbell was to him an excellent joke. He resolved to keep the five
guineas quietly which Henry lent him; and, at the same time, to frighten
this innocent industrious woman into paying him the value of his
bank-note.

Upon Mackenzie's return to Dr. Campbell's, after his fall from Sawney,
the first thing he heard was that his note was found; that it had been
stopped at the bank of Scotland; and that one of the clerks of the bank,
who brought it for his examination, had been some time waiting for his
return from riding. When the note was produced, Henry saw that two or
three of the words which had been written in ink, the name of the person
to whom it was payable, and the date of the month and year, were so pale
as to be scarcely visible; and that there was a round hole through one
corner of the paper. This round hole puzzled Henry, but he had no doubt
that the ink had been thus nearly obliterated by vitriolic acid. He
poured a few drops, diluted with water, upon some printing, and the ink
was quickly turned to nearly the same pale colour as that in Mackenzie's
note. The note was easily traced, as it had not passed through many
hands--our readers will be sorry to hear it--to M. Pasgrave, the
dancing-master. Mackenzie and the clerk went directly to his house,
found him at home, and without much preface, informed him of their
business. The dancing-master trembled from head to foot, and, though
innocent, exhibited all the signs of guilt; he had not the slightest
knowledge of business, and the manner and language of the banker's clerk
who accompanied Mackenzie terrified him beyond measure, because he did
not comprehend one word in ten that he said about checks, entries,
and day-books; and he was nearly a quarter of an hour before he could
recover sufficient presence of mind to consider from whom he received
the note. At length, after going over, in an unintelligible manner, all
the puzzled accounts of monies received and paid which he kept in his
head, he declared that he clearly recollected to have received the
ten-guinea note at Mr. Macpherson's, the tailor; that he went a few
weeks ago to settle his year's account with him; and that in change
for a twenty-pound note, he received that which the banker's clerk
now produced. To Mackenzie it was perfectly indifferent who was found
guilty, so that he could recover his money. "Settle it as you will
amongst you," said he, "the money must be refunded, or I must have you
all before a magistrate directly." Pasgrave, in great perturbation, set
out for Mr. Macpherson's, showed him the note, and reminded him of the
day when he paid his account. "If you received the note from us, sir,"
said the master-tailor, very calmly, "it must be entered in our books,
for we keep regular accounts." The tailor's foreman, who knew much more
of the affair than his master, appealed, with assumed security, to the
entry in the books. By this entry it appeared that M. Pasgrave
settled his account the 17th of October; that he paid the balance by a
twenty-pound note, and that he received in change a ten-guinea note on
Sir William Forbes's bank. "You see, sir," said the tailor, "this cannot
possibly be Mr. Mackenzie's; for his note is on the bank of Scotland.
Our entry is as full as possible; and I am ready to produce my books,
and to abide by them, in any court of justice in the world." M. Pasgrave
was totally at a loss; he could only repeat, that he remembered to have
received Mackenzie's note from one of the tailor's men, who brought it
to him from an inner room. The foreman boldly asserted, that he brought
the change exactly as his master gave it to him, and that he knew
nothing more of the matter. But, in fact, he knew a great deal more:
he had found the note in the pocket of Mackenzie's waistcoat, which his
servant had left to be mended, after he had torn it furtively, as has
been already related. When his master called him into the inner room,
to give him the change for Pasgrave, he observed that there was a
ten-guinea note wrapped up with some halfpence; and he thought that it
would be a prudent thing to substitute Mackenzie's note, which he had
by him, in the place of this. He accordingly gave Pasgrave Mackenzie's
note, and thrust the note which he had received from his master into a
corner of his trunk, where he usually kept little windfalls, that came
to him by the negligence of customers--toothpick-cases, loose silver,
odd gloves, &c., all which he knew how to dispose of. But this bank-note
was a higher prize than usual, and he was afraid to pass it till all
inquiry had blown over. He knew his master's regularity; and he thought
that if the note was stopped afterwards at any of the banks, it could
never be traced further than to M. Pasgrave. He was rejoiced to see that
this poor man was in such trepidation of mind that he could not, in the
least, use his understanding; and he saw, with much satisfaction, that
his master, who was a positive man, and proud of the accuracy of his
books, was growing red in the face in their defence. Mackenzie, in the
meantime, who had switched his boots with great impatience during their
debate, interfered at last with, "Come, gentlemen, we can't stand here
all day to hear you give one another the lie. One of you, it's plain,
must shell out your corianders; but, as you can't settle which, we must
put you to your oath, I see." "Mr. W----'s is not far off, and I am
ready to go before him with my books this instant," said the fiery
master-tailor. "My books were never called in question since I was in
trade till this instant; and nobody but a French dancing-master, who
understands no more of debtor and creditor than my goose, would stand
out against such an entry as this." To Mr. W----'s the tailor, his
foreman, the dancing-master, the banker's clerk, and Mackenzie,
repaired. Pasgrave turned paler than ever dancer turned before; and gave
himself, his character, and his wife and children, all up for lost,
when he heard that he was to be put upon his oath. He drew back when Mr.
W---- held the book to him, and demanded whether he would swear to the
person from whom he received the note. He said he could not swear; but
to the best of his belief--en conscience--en honneur--foi d'honnête
homme--he was convinced he received it from Mr. Macpherson's foreman.
The foreman, who, from one step in villany, found himself hurried on to
another and another, now scrupled not to declare that he was ready to
take his oath that he delivered the note and change, just as his master
gave it to him, to M. Pasgrave. The magistrate turned to the paler,
conscientious, incapacitated dancing-master, and in a severe tone
said--"Appearances are strangely against you, M. Pasgrave. Here's a
young gentleman has lost a bank-note--it is stopped at the bank
of Scotland--it is traced home to you--you say you got it from Mr.
Macpherson or his foreman--his books are produced--the entry in them is
clearly against you; for it states that the note given to you in change
was one of Sir William Forbes's bank; and this which I hold now in my
hand is of the Bank of Scotland. Please now to tell how this note of
the Bank of Scotland, which has been proved to be the property of Mr.
Mackenzie, came into your possession? From whom did you receive it? or
how did you come by it? I am not surprised that you decline taking an
oath upon this occasion." "Ah, monsieur, ayez pitié de moi!" cried
the innocent, but terrified man, throwing himself upon one knee, in
an attitude, which, on the stage, would have produced a sublime
effect--"Ah, monsieur, ayez pitié de moi! I have no more dan de child
no sense in affairs." Mackenzie interrupted him with a brutal laugh. The
more humane banker's clerk was moved by the simplicity of this avowed
ignorance of business. He went up to the distracted dancer, and said,
"It is not to be expected that every body should understand business as
_we_ do, sir: if you are innocent, only give yourself time to recollect;
and though it's unfortunate that you never keep any regular accounts,
maybe we shall be able to make out this affair of the entry. If Mr.
W---- will give me leave to take this pen and ink, and if you will try
to recollect all the persons from whom you have received money lately--"
"Ah, mon Dieu! dat is impossible." Then he began to name the quarterly
and half-yearly payments that he had received from his various pupils.
"Did any of them lately give you a ten-guinea note?" "Ah, oui, je
me rappelle--un jeune monsieur--un certain monsieur, qui ne veut pas
que--qui est là incognito--who I would not betray for the world; for he
has behave wid de most parfaite générosité to me." "But did he give
you a ten-guinea bank-note? that is all we want to know," said the
magistrate. "Mais--oui--yes." "About what time?" said the clerk. It was
about the beginning of October: and this was so near the time when he
settled accounts with Mr. Macpherson, the tailor, that he even himself
began to believe it possible that he had mistaken one note for the
other. "When the young gentleman gave you the note," said the banker's
clerk, "surely you must have looked at it--you must have observed
these remarkable stains?" Pasgrave replied, that he did look at it, he
supposed; that he saw it was a ten-guinea note; it might be stained, it
might not be stained; he could not pretend to be certain about it. He
repeated his assurances that he was ignorant of business, and of every
thing in this world but dancing. "Pour la danse, je m'y connois--pour
les affaires, je n'en sais rien, moi." He, with his usual simplicity,
added, that if Mr. W---- would give him leave, he would go to the young
gentleman, his friend, and learn from him exactly the number of the note
which he had given him; that he was sure he could recollect his own note
immediately. Mackenzie, who thought that this was merely pretence, in
order to escape, told him that he could not be suffered to go out upon
his parole. "But," said Mr. W----, "tell us the name of this young
gentleman who has so much generosity, and who lives incognito. I don't
like gentlemen who live incognito. I think I had a young man here before
me, about two months ago, charged with breaking a confectioner's windows
in a riot, the night of the great illuminations--Hey? don't I remember
some such thing? And you, M. Pasgrave, if I mistake not, interested
yourself mightily about this young man, and told me and my daughters,
sir, that he was a young gentleman incognito. I begin to see through
this affair. Perhaps this is the same young gentleman from whom you
received the note. And pray what value did you give for it?" Pasgrave,
whose fear of betraying Forester now increased his confusion, stammered,
and first said the note was a present, but afterwards added, "I have
been giving de young person lessons in dancing for des six week."

"Well, then, we must summon this young person," said Mr. W----. "Tell us
his name, if you please," said Mackenzie; "I have some suspicion that
I know your gentleman incognito." "You need not trouble him," said the
magistrate; "I know the name already, and I know where the bird is to
be found: his name, if he has not changed it since he was last in this
room, is Forester." "Forester!" exclaimed Mackenzie; "I thought so! I
always thought how he would turn out. I wonder what his friends, the
Campbells, will have to say for him now!"

Mr. W----'s pen stopped. "His friends, the Campbells--humph! So the
Campbells are his friends, are they?" repeated he. "They _were_ his
friends," answered Mackenzie; "but Mr. Forester thought proper, nobody
knows why, to run away from them, some months ago; the only reason I
could ever learn was that he did not like to live amongst gentlemen: and
he has been living ever since incognito, amongst blackguards, and we see
the fruits of it." Mackenzie eagerly handed the summons, as soon as it
was signed, to a constable; and Mr. W---- directed the constable to Mr.
----'s, the bookseller, adding, "Book-sellers and printers are dangerous
persons." The constable, who had seen Forester the night that he was
confined with Tom Random, knew his face and person; and we have told
our readers that he met Forester in George's-square, going to Dr.
Campbell's, to vindicate the innocence of the poor washerwoman.

The tailor's foreman was not a little alarmed when the summons was sent
for our hero; he dreaded that the voice of truth should be heard, and he
skulked behind the rest of the company. What astonishment did Forester
feel when he entered the room, and saw the group that surrounded the
justice's table!--Archibald Mackenzie, with an insulting sneer on his
lips--Pasgrave, with eyes fixed upon him in despair--Mr. Macpherson,
the tailor, pointing to an entry in his book--his foreman shrinking
from notice--the banker's clerk, with benevolent scepticism in his
countenance--and the justice, with a portentous scowl upon his brow.

"Come forward, Mr. Forester," said the magistrate, as our hero made a
sudden pause of astonishment; "come forward, sir!" Forester advanced
with calm intrepidity. "You are better dressed than when I had the
honour of seeing you here some time ago, sir. Are you a printer
still, or a gentleman? Your dress certainly bespeaks a change in your
condition." "I am sure I should hardly know Mr. Forester again, he has
grown such a beau--comparatively speaking, I mean," said Mackenzie. "But
certainly, M. Pasgrave, you must have made some mistake; I don't know
how to believe my senses! Is this the young gentleman to whom you
alluded? do you know him--?" "Give me leave, Mr. Mackenzie," interrupted
the justice: "I shall examine this young incognito myself. I think I
know how to come at the truth. Will you do me the favour, sir, to inform
me whether you recollect any thing of a ten-guinea bank-note which you
gave or paid, some time in last October, to this gentleman?" pointing
to M. Pasgrave. "I do," replied Forester, in a distinct, unembarrassed
voice, "perfectly well remember giving M. Pasgrave a ten-guinea
bank-note." "Ah, monsieur, je ne suis pas un ingrat. Ne pensez pas
que--" "Oh, M. Pasgrave," interrupted Mackenzie, "this is no time for
compliments and fine speeches: for God's sake, let us get to the bottom
of this affair without further ceremony!" "Sir," said the banker's
clerk, "all we want to know is the number of your note, and the firm of
the house. Was your note one of Sir William Forbes's, or of the Bank
of Scotland?" Forester was silent. "I do not recollect," said he, after
some pause. "You don't recollect, sir," said the justice, "is something
like an evasive answer. You must have a vast number of bank-notes then,
we must presume, if you cannot recollect to what bank your ten-guinea
note belonged." Forester did not understand this logic; but he simply
repeated his assertion. "Pray, sir," said the tailor, who could no
longer restrain his impatience--"Pray, sir," said the magistrate, in a
solemn manner, "be silent. I shall find out the truth. So, Mr. Forester,
you cannot possibly recollect the house of your note? You will tell us
next, I dare say, that you cannot possibly recollect how you came by
it." "Sir," said Forester, "if it is necessary, I can readily tell you
how I came by it." "It is very necessary, sir, for your own credit." "I
received it from Dr. Campbell." "Dr. Campbell!" repeated the magistrate,
changing his tone. "And I have some idea that the doctor gave me a list
of the numbers of that and four other notes, with which I fortunately
have not parted." "Some idea means nothing in a court of justice, sir;
if you have any such paper, you can do us the favour to produce it." Now
this list was locked up in the trunk, of which the key was dropped into
the brewing-vat. Richardson, the clerk, had returned the key to him;
but, such is the force of habit, he had not cured himself of the foolish
trick of twirling it upon his thumb; and about two months ago he dropped
it in one of his walks to Arthur's Seat. He long searched for it amongst
the rocky fragments, but at last gave it up--he little imagined of how
much consequence it might be to him. Dr. Campbell had once refused to
break open the lock, and he felt very unwilling to apply to him in his
present circumstances. However, he wrote a few lines to Henry Campbell;
but, as soon as he had written them, his pride again revolted from
the thoughts of supplicating the assistance of his friend in such
a disgraceful situation. "If you don't choose to write," said the
officious malevolence of Archibald, "I can, however, speak; I'll desire
Dr. Campbell to open your trunk, and search for the paper." He left the
room before Forester could make any further opposition.

"I have answered, I hope, both distinctly and respectfully, all the
questions that you have asked me," said Forester, turning to Mr. W----.
"I hope you will no longer keep me in the dark. Of what am I suspected?"
"I will tell you, sir," replied the deliberate, unfeeling magistrate;
"you are suspected of having, I will not say _stolen_, but you are
more than suspected of having come unfairly by a certain ten-guinea
bank-note, which the young gentleman who has just left the room lost
a few months ago." Forester, as this speech was slowly pronounced,
sat down, folded his arms, and appeared totally insensible--quite
unconscious that he was in the presence of a magistrate, or that any
human being was observing him. "Ah, mon cher monsieur, pardonnez!" cried
Pasgrave, bursting into tears. "N'en parlons plus," added he, turning
to the magistrate. "Je payerai tout ce qu'il faut. I will pay de ten
guineas. I will satisfy every body. I cannot never forgive myself if I
bring him into any disgrace." "Disgrace!" exclaimed Forester, starting
up, and repeating the word in a tone which made every person in the
room, not excepting the phlegmatic magistrate, start and look up to him,
with a sudden feeling of inferiority. His ardent eye spoke the language
of his soul. No words could express his emotion. The master-tailor
dropped his day-book. "Constable--call a constable!" cried the justice.
"Sir, you forget in whose presence you are--you think, I suppose, that
your friends, the Campbells, will bear you out. Sir, I would have you
to know that all the Campbells in Scotland can't bail you for a felony.
Sir, philosophers should know these things. If you cannot clear yourself
to my entire satisfaction, Mr. Forester, I shall commit you--in one
word--to gaol: yes--look as you please, sir--to gaol. And if the doctor
and his son, and all his family, come up to bail you, I shall, _meo
periculo_, refuse their bail. The law, sir, is no respecter of persons.
So none of your rhodomontades, young gentleman, in my presence; but step
into this closet, if you please; and, I advise you, bring your mind into
a becoming temperament, whilst I go to dinner. Gentlemen," continued
he to Macpherson and Pasgrave, "you'll be so good to wait here in this
apartment. Constable, look to your prisoner," pointing to the door of
the closet. "John, let me know when Dr. Campbell arrives; and tell them
to send up dinner directly," said the justice to his butler.

Whilst he dines, we must leave the tailor complaining that he was
wasting precious time; the foreman in the panic of guilt; and the
good-natured dancing-master half distracted betwixt his fears and his
ignorance. He looked from time to time through the key-hole of the
closet in which Forester was confined, and exclaimed, "Grand Dieu! comme
il a l'air noble à cet instant! Ah! lui coupable! he go to gaol! it is
impossible!"

"We shall see how that will be presently," said the foreman, who had
hitherto preserved absolute silence. "I abide by my books," said the
master-tailor; "and I wish Dr. Campbell would make haste. _I have lost a
day!_"

In spite of the tailor's imperial exclamation, he was obliged to wait
some time longer. When Mackenzie arrived at Dr. Campbell's, Henry was
not at home: he was gone to the house at the back of the meadows, to
prepare some chemical experiments for the next day's lecture. Mackenzie,
however, found Dr. Campbell at home in his study; and, in a soft
hypocritical voice, lamented that he was obliged to communicate some
disagreeable circumstances relating to young Mr. Forester. "You do
not, I presume, know where that unfortunate, misguided youth is at
present--at this moment, I mean." "I do not know where he is at this
moment," said Dr. Campbell, calmly; "but I know where he has been for
some time--at Mr. ----'s, the bookseller. I have had my eye upon him
ever since he left this house. I have traced him from place to place.
Though I have said little about him, Mr. Mackenzie, I have a great
regard for my unfortunate ward." "I am sorry for it, sir," said
Mackenzie: "I fear I must wound your feelings the more deeply." "What is
the matter? pray speak at once," cried Dr. Campbell, who now forgot all
his usual calmness. "Where is Forester?" "He is at this moment before
Mr. W----, the magistrate, sir, charged with--but, I own, I cannot
believe him guilty--" "Charged with what? For God's sake, speak plainly,
Mr. Mackenzie!" "Then, in one word, sir, my lost bank-note is traced
home to Mr. Forester. M. Pasgrave says he received it from him."
"Surely, sir," said Dr. Campbell, with indignation, "you would not
insinuate that Forester has stolen your bank-note?" "I insinuate
nothing, doctor," said Archibald; "but, I fear, the thing is too
plainly proved. My bank-note has certain stains, by which it has been
identified. All that I know is, that Mr. W---- says he can take no
bail; and that he must commit Mr. Forester to gaol, unless he can clear
himself. He says, that a few days before he left your house, you
paid him his quarterly allowance of fifty guineas, in five ten-guinea
bank-notes." "He says true--I did so," said Dr. Campbell eagerly. "And
he says that you gave them to him wrapped in a piece of paper, on which
the numbers of the notes were written." "I remember it distinctly: I
desired him to take care of that paper." "He is not famous for taking
care, you know, sir, of any thing. He says, he believes he threw it
into his trunk; but he has lost the key of the trunk, I understand." "No
matter; we can break it open this instant, and search for the paper,"
cried Dr. Campbell, who was now extremely alarmed for his ward.
Mackenzie stood by without offering any assistance, whilst Dr. Campbell
broke open the trunk, and searched it with the greatest anxiety. It was
in terrible disorder. The coat and waistcoat which Forester wore at the
ball were crammed in at the top; and underneath appeared unfolded linen,
books, boots, maps, shoes, cravats, fossils, and heaps of little
rumpled bits of paper, in which the fossils had once been contained. Dr.
Campbell opened every one of these. The paper he wanted was not amongst
them. He took every thing out of the box, shook and searched all the
pockets of the coat, in which Forester used, before his reformation,
to keep hoards of strange papers. No list of bank-notes appeared. At
length, Dr. Campbell espied the white corner of a paper-mark in a volume
of Goldsmith's Animated Nature, He pulled out this mark, and to his
great joy, he found it to be the very paper he wanted. "So it's found,
is it?" said Mackenzie, disappointed; whilst Dr. Campbell seized his
hat, left every thing upon the floor, and was very near locking the door
of the room upon Mackenzie. "Don't lock me in here, doctor--I am going
back with you to Mr. W----'s" said Arcibald. "Won't you stay? dinner's
going up--Mr. W---- was going this dinner when I came away." Without
listening to him, Dr. Campbell just let him out, locked the door, and
hurried away to his poor ward.

"I have let things go to far," said he to himself. "As long as
Forester's credit was not in danger, as long as he was unknown, it was
very well; but now his character is at stake; he may pay too dear for
his experience."

"Dr. Campbell," said the pompous magistrate, who hated philosophers,
rising from table as Dr. Campbell entered, "do not speak to me of
bailing this ward of yours--it is impossible, sir; I know my duty." "I
am not come to offer bail for my ward," said Dr. Campbell, "but to prove
his innocence." "We must hope the best," said Mr. W----; and, having
forced the doctor to pledge him in a bumper of port, "Now I am ready to
proceed again to the examination of all parties concerned."

Dr. Campbell was now shown into the room where Mr. Macpherson, his
foreman and Pasgrave, were waiting. "Ah, monsieur, Dieu merci, vous
voila!" exclaimed Pasgrave. "You may go," said Mr. W---- to the
constable: "but wait below stairs." He unlocked the closet-door.
Forester, at the sight of Dr. Campbell, covered his face with his hands;
but, an instant afterwards, advanced with intrepidity. "You cannot, I am
sure, believe me to be guilty of any meanness, Dr. Campbell," said he.
"Imprudent I have been, and I suffer for my folly." "Guilty!" cried
Dr. Campbell; "no: I could almost as soon suspect my own son of such an
action. But my belief is nothing to the purpose. We must _prove_ your
innocence." "Ah, oui, monsieur--and mine too; for I am innocent, I can
assure you," cried M. Pasgrave.

"The whole business, sir," said the banker's clerk, who had, by this
time, returned to hear the termination of the affair--"the whole thing
can be settled in two minutes, by a gentleman like you, who understands
business. Mr. Forester cannot recollect the number or the firm of a
ten-guinea bank-note which he gave to M. Pasgrave. M. Pasgrave cannot
recollect either; and he is in doubt whether he received this
stained note, which Mr. Mackenzie lost, from Mr. Forester or from
Mr. Macpherson, the tailor." "There can be no doubt about me," said
Macpherson. "Dr. Campbell, will you be so good to look at the entry? I
acknowledge, I gave M. Pasgrave a ten-guinea note; but here's the number
of it, 177, of Forbes's bank. Mr. Mackenzie's note, you see, is of the
bank of Scotland; and the stains upon it are so remarkable, that, if I
had ever seen it before, I should certainly remember it. I'll take
my oath I never saw it before." "Sir," said Forester eagerly to Dr.
Campbell, "you gave me five ten-guinea notes: here are four of them in
this pocket-book; the fifth I gave to M. Pasgrave. Can you tell me the
number of that note?" "I can," said Dr. Campbell, producing the paper
which he found in Goldsmith's Animated Nature. "I had the precaution
to write down the numbers of all your notes myself: here they are."
Forester opened his pocket-book: his four remaining notes were compared,
and perfectly agreed with the numbers in the list. The fifth, the number
of the note which he gave to Pasgrave, was 1260, of the New Bank. "One
of your ten-guinea notes," said Dr. Campbell to Pasgrave, "you paid
into the bank of Scotland; and this gentleman," pointing to the banker's
clerk, "stopped it this morning. Now you have had another ten-guinea
note; what became of that?" Pasgrave, who understood Dr. Campbell's
plain method of questioning him, answered immediately, "I did give the
other to my hair-dresser, not long ago, who lives in ---- street." Dr.
Campbell instantly went himself to the hair-dresser, found that he had
the note still in his possession, brought him to Mr. W----'s, and, when
the note was examined, it was found to be 1260 of the New Bank, which
exactly corresponded with the entry in the list of notes which Dr.
Campbell had produced.

"Then all is right," said Dr. Campbell. "Ah, oui!--Ah, non!" exclaimed
Pasgrave. "What will become of me?" "Compose yourself, my good sir,"
said Dr. Campbell. "You had but two ten-guinea notes, you are sure of
that?" "But two--but two: I will swear but two." "You are now certain
which of these two notes you had from my ward. The other, you say, you
received from ----" "From dis gentleman, I will swear," cried Pasgrave,
pulling the tailor's foreman forwards. "I can swear now I am in no
embarras: I am sure I did get de oder note from dis gentleman." The
master-tailor was astonished to see all the pallid marks of guilt in his
foreman's countenance. "Did you change the note that I gave you in
the inner room?" said Mr. Macpherson. The foreman, as soon as he could
command his voice, denied the charge; and persisted in it that he gave
the note and change, which his master wrapped up, exactly as it was, to
the dancing-master. Dr. Campbell proposed that the tailor's shop, and
the foreman's room, should be searched. Mr. W---- sent proper people
to Mr. Macpherson's; and whilst they are searching his house, we may
inquire what has become of Henry Campbell.

THE CATASTROPHE.

Henry Campbell, the last time we heard of him, was at the house at the
back of the meadows. When he went into the large room to his chemical
experiments, the little girl, who was proud of having arranged it
neatly, ran on before him, and showed him the places where all his
things were put. "The writing and the figures are not rubbed off your
slate--there it is, sir," said she, pointing to a high shelf. "But whose
handkerchief is this?" said Henry, taking up a handkerchief which
was under the slate. "Gracious! that must be the good gentleman's
handkerchief; he missed it just as he was going out of the house. He
thought he had left it at the washerwoman's, where I met him; and
he's gone back to look for it there. I'll run with it to the
washerwoman's,--maybe she knows where to find him." "But you have not
told me who he is. Whom do you mean by the good gentleman?" "The good
gentleman, sir, that I saw with you at the watchmaker's, the day that
you helped me to carry the great geranium out of my grandmother's room."
"Do you mean that Forester has been here?" exclaimed Henry. "I never
heard his name, sir; but I mean that the gentleman has been here, whom I
call the good gentleman, because it was he who went with me to my cross
schoolmistress, to try to persuade her to use me well. She beat me, to
be sure, after he was gone, for what he had said; but I'm not the less
obliged to him, because he did every thing as he thought for the best.
And so I'll run with his handkerchief to the woman's, who will give it
safe to him."

Henry recollected his promise to his father. It required all his power
over himself to forbear questioning the child, and endeavouring to
find out something more of his friend. He determined to mention the
circumstance to his father, and to Flora, as soon as he returned home.
He was always impatient to tell any thing to his sister that interested
himself or his friends; for Flora's gaiety was not of that unfeeling
sort which seeks merely for amusement, and which, unmixed with sympathy
for others, may divert in a companion, but disgusts in a friend.

Whilst Henry was reflecting upon the manner in which he might most
expeditiously arrange his chemical experiments and return home, the
little girl came running back, with a face of great distress. As soon
as she had breath to speak, she told Henry that when she went to the
washerwoman's with the handkerchief, she was told a sad piece of news;
that Mr. Forester had been taken up, and carried before Mr. W----, the
magistrate. "We don't know what he has done: I'm sure I don't think he
can have done any thing wrong." Henry no sooner heard these words than
he left all his retorts, rushed out of the house, hurried home to his
father, and learned from Flora, with great surprise, that his father had
already been sent for, and was gone to Mr. W----'s. She did not know the
circumstances that Mackenzie related to Dr. Campbell, but she told him
that her father seemed much alarmed; that she met him crossing the hall,
and that he could not stop to speak to her. Henry proceeded directly to
Mr. W----'s, and he arrived there just as the people returned from the
search of the tailor's house. His opinion of Forester's innocence was
so strong, that when he entered the room, he instantly walked up to
him, and embraced him, with a species of frank confidence in his manner
which, to Forester, was more expressive than any thing that he could
have said. The whole affair was quickly explained to him; and the people
who had been sent to Mr. Macpherson's now came up-stairs to Mr. W----,
and produced a ten-guinea bank-note, which was found in the foreman's
box. Upon examination, this note was discovered to be the very note
which Mr. Macpherson sent with the change to Pasgrave. It was No. 177,
of Sir William Forbes's bank, as mentioned in the circumstantial entry
in the day-book. The joy of the poor dancing-master at this complete
proof of his innocence was rapturous and voluble. Secure of the sympathy
of Forester, Henry, and Dr. Campbell, he looked at them by turns, whilst
he congratulated himself upon this "_éclaircissement_," and assured the
banker's clerk that he would in future keep accounts. We are impatient
to get rid of the guilty foreman: he stood a horrible image of despair.
He was committed to gaol; and was carried away by the constables,
without being pitied by any person present. Every body, however, was
shocked. Mackenzie broke silence first, by exclaiming, "Well, now, I
presume, Mr. W----, I may take possession of my bank-note again." He
took up all the notes which lay upon the table to search amongst them
for his own. "Mine, you know, is stained," said Archibald. "But it is
very singular," said Henry Campbell, who was looking over his shoulder,
"that here are two stained notes. That which was found in the foreman's
box is stained in one corner, exactly as yours was stained, Mr.
Mackenzie." Macpherson, the tailor, now stooped to examine it. "Is this
No. 177, the note that I sent in change, by my foreman, to M. Pasgrave?
I'll take my oath it was not stained in that manner when I took it out
of my desk. It was a new and quite clean note: it must have been stained
since." "And it must have been stained with vitriolic acid," continued
Henry. "Ay, there's cunning for you," cried Archibald. "The foreman, I
suppose, stained it, that it might not be known again." "Have you any
vitriolic acid in your house?" pursued Henry, addressing himself to
the master-tailor. "Not I, indeed, sir; we have nothing to do with such
things. They'd be very dangerous to us." "Pray," said Henry, "will you
give me leave, Mr. W----, to ask the person who searched the foreman's
box a few questions?" "Certainly sir," said Mr. W----; "though, I
protest, I cannot see what you are driving at." Henry inquired what was
found in the box with the bank-note. The man who searched it enumerated
a variety of things. "None of these," said Henry, "could have stained
the note: are you sure that there was nothing else?" "Nothing in the
world; nothing but an old glass stopper, I believe." "I wish I could
see that stopper," said Henry. "This note was rolled round it," said the
man: "but I threw it into the box again. I'll go and fetch it, sir, if
you have any curiosity to see it." "Curiosity to see an old stopper?
No!" cried Archibald Mackenzie, with a forced laugh; "what good would
that do us? We have been kept here long enough. I move that we go
home to our dinners." But Dr. Campbell, who saw that Henry had some
particular reason for wishing to see this glass stopper, seconded his
son. The man went for it; and when he brought it into the room, Henry
Campbell looked at it very carefully, and then decidedly said, fixing
his eyes upon Archibald Mackenzie, who in vain struggled to keep his
countenance from changing. "This glass stopper, Mr. Mackenzie, is the
stopper of my father's vitriolic acid bottle, that was broken the night
the cat was killed. This stopper has stained both the bank-notes. And
it must have been in the pocket of your waistcoat." "My pocket!"
interrupted Archibald: "how should it come into my pocket? It never was
in _my_ pocket, sir." Henry pointed to the stain on his waistcoat. He
wore the very waistcoat in question. "Sir," said Archibald, "I don't
know what you mean by pointing at my waistcoat. It is stained, it is
true, and very likely by vitriolic acid; but, as I have been so often in
the doctor's laboratory, when your chemical experiments have been going
on, is it not very natural to suppose that a drop of one of the acids
might have fallen on my clothes? I have seen your waistcoats stained,
I am sure. Really, Mr. Campbell, you are unfriendly, uncharitable; your
partiality for Mr. Forester should not blind you, surely. I know you
want to exculpate him from having any hand in the death of that cat: but
that should not, my dear sir, make you forget what is due to justice.
You should not, permit me to say, endeavour to criminate an innocent
person." "This is all very fine," said Henry; "and you may prove your
innocence to me at once, Mr. Mackenzie, if you think proper, by showing
that the waistcoat was really, as you assert, stained by a drop of
vitriolic acid falling upon the outside of it. Will you show us the
inside of the pocket?" Mackenzie, who was now in too much confusion to
know distinctly what Henry meant to prove, turned the pocket inside out,
and repeated, "That stopper was never in my pocket, I'll swear." "Don't
swear to that, for God's sake," said Henry. "Consider what you are
saying. You see that there is a hole burnt in this pocket. Now if a drop
of acid had fallen, as you said, upon the outside of the waistcoat, it
must have been more burnt on the outside than on the inside." "I
don't know--I can't pretend to be positive," said Archibald; "but what
signifies all this rout about the stopper?" "It signifies a great deal
to me," said Dr. Campbell, turning away from Mackenzie with contempt,
and addressing himself to his ward, who met his approving eye with proud
delight--"it signifies a great deal to me. Forgive me, Mr. Forester,
for having doubted your word for a moment." Forester held his guardian's
hand, without being able for some instants to reply. "You are coming
home with us, Forester?" said Henry. "No," said Dr. Campbell, smiling;
"you must not ask him to come home with us to-night. We have a little
dance at our house to-night. Lady Catherine Mackenzie wished to take
leave of her Edinburgh friends. She goes from us to-morrow. We must not
expect to see Forester at a ball; but to-morrow morning--" "I see," said
Forester, smiling, "you have no faith in my reformation. Well, I have
affairs to settle with my master, the printer. I must go home, and take
leave of him. He has been a good master to me; and I must go and finish
my task of correcting. Adieu." He abruptly left Dr. Campbell and Henry,
and went to the bookseller's, to inform him of all that had passed, and
to thank him for his kindness. "You will be at a loss to-morrow for a
corrector of the press," said he. "I am determined you shall not suffer
for my vagaries. Send home the proof-sheets of the work in hand to me,
at Dr. Campbell's, and I will return them to you punctually corrected.
Employ me till you have provided yourself with another, I will not say a
better hand. I do not imagine," continued Forester, "that I can pay
you for your kindness to me by presents; indeed, I know you are in such
circumstances that you disdain money. But I hope you will accept of a
small mark of my regard--a complete font of new types."

Whilst Forester's generous heart expanded with joy at the thoughts of
returning once more to his friends, we are sorry to leave him, to finish
the history of Archibald Mackenzie. He sneaked home after Dr. Campbell
and Henry, whose silent contempt he well understood. Dr. Campbell
related all that had passed to Lady Catherine. Her ladyship showed
herself more apprehensive that her son's meanness should be made known
to the world, than indignation or sorrow for his conduct. Archibald,
whilst he was dressing for the ball, began to revolve in his mind
certain words which his mother had said to him _about his having
received the lie direct from Henry Campbell--his not having the spirit
of a gentleman._ "She certainly meant," said he to himself, "that I
ought to fight him. It's the only way I can come off, as he spoke so
plainly before Mr. W----, and all those people: the banker's clerk
too was by; and, as my mother says, it will be talked of. I'll get Sir
Philip Gosling to go with my message. I think I've heard Dr. Campbell
say, he disapproved of duels. Perhaps Henry won't fight. Has Sir Philip
Gosling sent to say, whether he would be with us at the ball to-night?"
said Archibald to the servant who was dressing his hair. "No, sir,"
replied the servant: "Sir Philip's man has not been here: but Major
O'Shannon has been here twice since you were away, to see you. He said
he had some message to deliver from Sir Philip to you." "To me!
message to me!" repeated Archibald, turning pale. Archibald knew Major
O'Shannon, who had of late insinuated himself into Sir Philip Gosling's
favour, had a particular dislike to him, and had successfully bullied
him upon one or two occasions. Archibald had that civil cowardice,
which made him excessively afraid of the opinion of the world; and Major
O'Shannon, a gamester, who was jealous of his influence over the rich
dupe, Sir Philip, determined to entangle him in a quarrel. The major
knocked at the door a third time before Archibald was dressed; and when
he was told that he was dressing, and could not see any one, he sent up
the following note:--

"SIR,

"The last time I met you at the livery-stables, in company with my
friend, Sir Philip Gosling, I had the honour of telling you my mind, in
terms sufficiently explicit, concerning a transaction, which cannot have
escaped your memory. My friend, Sir Philip, declares you never hinted
that the pony was spavined. I don't pretend to be so good a jockey as
you, but you'll excuse my again saying, I can't consider your conduct
as that of a gentleman. Sir Philip is of my mind; and if you resent my
interference, I am ready to give you the satisfaction of a gentleman.
If not, you will do well to leave Edinburgh along with your mother
to-morrow morning; for Edinburgh is no place for cowards, as long as one
has the honour of living in it, who calls himself (by courtesy)

"Your humble servant,

"CORNELIUS O'SHANNON.

"P.S. Sir Philip is at your service, after your settling with me."

Archibald, oppressed with the sense of his own meanness, and somewhat
alarmed at the idea of fighting three duels, to retrieve his credit,
thought it best to submit, without struggle, in the first instance, to
that public disgrace which he had merited. He wrote a shabby apology to
Major O'Shannon and Sir Philip, concluding with saying, that rather than
lose a friend he so much valued as Sir Philip Gosling, he was willing
to forget all that had passed, and even to take back the pony, and to
return Sawney, if the matter could, by this means, be adjusted to his
satisfaction. He then went to his mother, and talked to her, in a high
style, of his desperate intentions with respect to Henry Campbell.
"Either he or I must fall, before we quit the ground," said the artful
Archibald--well knowing that Lady Catherine's maternal tenderness
would be awakened by these ideas. Other ideas were also awakened in
the prudent mother's mind. Dr. Campbell was nearly related to a general
officer, from whom she looked for promotion for her son. She repented,
upon reflection, of what she had hastily said concerning _the lie
direct, and the spirit of a gentleman_; and she softened down her pride,
and talked of her dislike to breaking up old family friendships. Thence
she digressed into hints of the advantages that might accrue from
cultivating Dr. Campbell's good opinion; admitted that Henry was
strangely prejudiced in favour of his rough friend Forester; but
observed that Mr. Forester, after all, though singular, was a young man
of merit, and at the head of a very considerable estate. "Archibald,"
said she, "we must make allowances, and conciliate matters--unless you
make this young gentleman your friend, you can never hope to be on an
eligible footing with his guardian. His guardian, you see, is glad to
get him back again, and, I dare say, has his reasons. I never saw him,
and I know him well, in such spirits in my life as he was when he came
back to us to announce the probability of his ward's return to-morrow
morning. The doctor, I dare say, has good reasons for what he does; and
I understand his ward is reconciled to the idea of living in the world,
and enjoying his fine fortune like other people. So I hope you and he,
and of course you and the doctor, and Henry Campbell, will be very good
friends. I shall leave you at Edinburgh for a few months, till we get
our commission; and I shall beg the doctor to introduce you to his
friend and relation, General D----. If he can do nothing for you, you
may look towards the Church. I trust to your prudence, not to think of
Flora Campbell, though I leave you in the house with her; for you can't
afford, Archibald, to marry a girl with so small a fortune; and, you may
be sure, her friends have other views for her. Pray let me hear no more
of duels and quarrels. And let us go down into the ball-room; for Miss
Campbell has been dressed and down-stairs this half hour; and I would
not have you inattentive--that might displease as much as the other
extreme. In short, I may safely leave you to your own discretion." Lady
Catherine, after this prudent exhortation, entered the ball-room,
where all the company soon after assembled. Seated in gay ranges,
the well-dressed belles were eager for the dancing to commence. Lady
Catherine stood by Dr. Campbell; and as soon as the ball began, when the
music played, and she saw every one absorbed in themselves, or in their
partners, she addressed herself to the doctor on the subject which was
next her heart, or rather next her imagination. "The general is to be
with you shortly, I understand," said she. Dr. Campbell coldly answered
in the affirmative. "To be candid with you, doctor, if you'll sit down,
I want to have a little chat with you about my Archibald. He is not
every thing I could wish, and I see you are displeased with him about
this foolish business that has just happened. For my own part, I think
him to blame; but we must pardon, we must make allowances for the errors
of youth; and I need not, to a man of your humanity, observe what a
cruel thing it is to prejudice the world against a young man, by telling
little anecdotes to his disadvantage. Relations must surely uphold one
another; and I am convinced you will speak of Archibald with candour
and friendship." "With candour and with truth," replied Dr. Campbell. "I
cannot pretend to feel friendship merely on the score of relationship."

The proud blood mounted into Lady Catherine's face, and she replied,
"Some consideration of one's own relations, I think, is not unbecoming.
Archibald, I should have thought, had as strong a claim upon Dr.
Campbell's friendship as the son of an utter stranger to the family. Old
Mr. Forester had a monstrous fortune, 'tis true; but his wife, who was
no grand affair, I believe--a merchant's daughter, I'm told--brought him
the greatest part of it; and yet, without any natural connexion between
the families, or any thing very desirable, setting fortune out of the
question, you accept the guardianship of this young man, and prefer him,
I plainly see, to my Archibald. I candidly ask you the question, and
answer me candidly."

"As you have explicitly asked the question, I will answer your ladyship
candidly. I do prefer my ward to your son. I have avoided drawing
comparisons between your son and Forester; and I now wish to avoid
speaking of Mr. Archibald Mackenzie, because I have little hope of being
of service to him."

"Nay," said Lady Catherine, softening her tone, "you know you have it in
your power to be of the greatest service to him."

"I have done all I could," said Dr. Campbell, with a sigh; "but habits
of--"

"Oh, but I'm not talking of habits," interrupted Lady Catherine. "I'll
make him alter his habits. We shall soon turn him into what you like:
he's very quick; and you must not expect every young man to be just cut
out upon the pattern of our dear Henry. I don't want to trouble you to
alter his habits, or to teach him chemistry, or any of those things. But
you can, you know, without all that, do him an essential service."

"How?" said Dr. Campbell.

"Why how? I don't know you this evening, you are so dry. Ken you not
what I mean? Speak three words for him to your friend, the general."

"Your ladyship must excuse me," said Dr. Campbell.

Lady Catherine was stunned by this distinct refusal. She urged Dr.
Campbell to explain the cause of his dislike to her son.

"There is a poor washerwoman now below stairs," replied Dr. Campbell,
"who can explain to you more than I wish to explain; and a story about a
horse of Sir Philip Gosling was told to me the other day, by one of the
baronet's friends, which I should be glad Mr. Archibald Mackenzie could
contradict effectually."

"Archibald, come here," said Lady Catherine: "before the next dance
begins, I must speak to you. What is this about a horse of Sir Philip
Gosling?"

"Ma'am!" said Archibald, with great astonishment. At this instant one
of Dr. Campbell's servants came into the room, and gave two notes to
Archibald, which, he said, two gentlemen had just left, and desired him
to deliver to Mr. Mackenzie whilst he was in the ball-room, if possible.

"What is it?--What are they, child?" cried Lady Catherine. "I will see
them." Her ladyship snatched the notes, read, and when she saw that
her son, in the grossest terms, was called a coward, for refusing the
challenges of two such fashionable men as Sir Philip Gosling and Major
O'Shannon, all her hopes of him were at an end. "Our family is disgraced
for ever!" she exclaimed; and then, perceiving that she had uttered this
unguarded sentence loud enough for several of the company to hear, she
endeavoured to laugh, and fell into violent hysterics. She was carried
out of the ball-room. A whisper now ran round the room of--"What's the
matter with Lady Catherine Mackenzie?" It was at an unfortunate
moment that she was carried out, for all the dancers had just seated
themselves, after a brisk country dance; and the eyes of all the young
and old were upon her ladyship as she made her exit. A young man, a
friend of Major O'Shannon, who was present, whispered the secret to his
partner; she, of course, to her next neighbour. Archibald saw that the
contents of the notes were made public; and he quitted the apartment,
"to inquire how his mother did."

The buzz of scandal was general for some moments; but a new object soon
engrossed the attention of the company. "Pray," said a young lady, who
was looping up Flora Campbell's gown, "who is this gentleman, who is
just coming into the room?" Flora looked up, and saw a well-dressed
stranger entering the room, who had much the appearance of a gentleman.
He certainly resembled a person she had seen before; but she could
scarcely believe that her eyes did not deceive her. Therefore she
hesitatingly replied to the young lady's question, "I don't know--I am
not sure." But she, an instant afterwards, saw her brother Henry and
her father advance so eagerly to meet the stranger, that her doubts
vanished; and, as he now directed his steps towards the spot where
she was standing, she corrected her first answer to her companion's
question, and said, "Yes, I fancy--it certainly is--Mr. Forester."
Forester, with an open countenance, slightly tinged with the blush
of ingenuous shame, approached her, as if he was afraid she had not
forgotten some things which he wished to be forgotten; and yet as if he
was conscious that he was not wholly unworthy of her esteem. "Amongst
other prejudices of which I have cured myself," said he to Dr. Campbell,
"since we parted, I have cured myself of my foolish antipathy to Scotch
reels."

"That I can scarcely believe," said Dr. Campbell, with an incredulous
smile.

"I will convince you of it," said Forester, "if you will promise to
forget all my other follies."

"_All!_" said Dr. Campbell. "Convince me first; and then it will be time
enough to make such a desperate promise."

Flora was rather surprised when our once cynical hero begged the favour
of her hand, and led her to dance a reel. M. Pasgrave would have been in
ecstasy if he had seen his pupil's performance.

"And now, my dear Forester," said Dr. Campbell, as his ward returned
to claim his promise of a general amnesty, "if you do not turn out a
coxcomb, if you do not 'mistake reverse of wrong for right,' you will
infallibly be a very great man. Give me a pupil who can cure himself of
any one foible, and I have hope of him. What hope must I not have of him
who has cured himself of so many!"



THE PRUSSIAN VASE

Frederick the Second, king of Prussia, after his conquest of Saxony,
transported, it is said{1}, by force, several manufacturers from Dresden
to Berlin, where he was very desirous of establishing the manufacture
of china. These unfortunate people, separated from their friends, their
home, and their native country, were compelled to continue their labours
for the profit and for the glory of their conqueror. Amongst the number
of those sufferers was Sophia Mansfeld. She was young, handsome, and
possessed considerable talents. Several pieces of porcelain of her
design and modelling were shown to Frederick, when he visited the
manufactory at Meissen, in Saxony; and their taste and workmanship
appeared to him so exquisite, that he determined to transport the artist
to his capital. But from the time of her arrival at Berlin, Sophia
Mansfeld's genius seemed to forsake her. It was her business to sketch
designs, and to paint them on the porcelain; but either she could not
or would not execute these with her former elegance: the figures were
awkward and spiritless, and it was in vain that the overseer of the
works attempted to rouse her to exertion; she would sit for hours, with
her pencil in her hand, in a sort of reverie. It was melancholy to see
her. The overseer had compassion upon her; but his compassion was not so
great as his dread of the king's displeasure; and he at length declared,
that the next time Frederick visited the works, he must complain of her
obstinate idleness.

{Footnote 1: Vide Wraxall'g Memoirs of the Court of Berlin.}

The monarch was expected in a few days; for, in the midst, of his
various occupations, Frederick, who was at this time extremely intent
upon the establishment of the porcelain manufactory at Berlin, found
leisure frequently to inspect it in person. The king, however, was
prevented from coming at the appointed hour by a review at Potzdam. His
majesty had formed the singular project of embodying, and training to
the science of arms, the Jews in his dominions{2}. They were rather
awkward in learning the manual exercise; and the Jewish review, though
it afforded infinite amusement to the spectators, put Frederick so much
out of humour, that, as soon as it was over, he rode to his palace of
Sans Souci, and shut himself up for the remainder of the morning. The
preceding evening an English traveller, who had passed some time at
Paris with the Count de Lauragais, in trying experiments upon porcelain
clays, and who had received much instruction on this subject from Mr.
Wedgewood, of Etruria, had been presented to the king, and his majesty
had invited him to be present at a trial of some new process of
importance, which was to be made this morning at his manufactory.
The English traveller, who was more intent upon his countryman
Mr. Wedgewood's fame than upon the martial manoeuvres of the Jews,
proceeded, as soon as the review was finished, to exhibit his English
specimens to a party of gentlemen, who had appointed to meet him at the
china-works at Berlin.

{Footnote 2: Wraxall's Memoirs of the Court of Berlin, &c.}

Of this party, was a youth of the name of Augustus Laniska, who was
at this time scarcely seventeen years old. He was a Pole by birth--a
Prussian by education. He had been bred up at the military school at
Potzdam, and being distinguished by Frederick as a boy of high spirit
and capacity, he was early inspired with enthusiastic admiration of this
monarch. His admiration, however, was neither blind nor servile. He
saw Frederick's faults as well as his great qualities; and he often
expressed himself with more openness and warmth upon this subject than
prudence could justify. He had conversed with unusual freedom about
Frederick's character with our English traveller; and whilst he was
zealous to display every proof of the king's greatness of mind, he was
sometimes forced to acknowledge that "there are disadvantages in living
under the power of a despotic sovereign."

"A despotic sovereign! You will not then call your Frederick a despot?"
whispered the English traveller to the young Pole, as they entered the
china-works at Berlin. "This is a promising manufactory, no doubt,"
continued he; "and Dresden china will probably soon be called Berlin
china, by which the world in general will certainly be much benefited.
But in the meantime look around you, and read your monarch's history
in the eyes of those prisoners of war--for such I must call these
expatriated manufacturers."

There were, indeed, many countenances in which great dejection was
visible. "Look at that picture of melancholy," resumed the Englishman,
pointing to the figure of Sophia Mansfeld--"observe even now, whilst the
overseer is standing near her, how reluctantly she works! 'Tis the way
with all slaves. Our English manufacturers (I wish you could see them)
work in quite another manner--for they are free--"

"And are free men, or free women, never ill?" said Laniska; "or do you
Englishmen blame your king, whenever any of his subjects turn pale?--The
woman at whom you are now looking is evidently ill. I will inquire from
the overseer what is the matter with her."

Laniska then turned to the overseer, and asked him in German several
questions, to which he received answers that he did not translate to the
English traveller; he was unwilling that any thing unfavourable to the
cause of his sovereign should appear; and, returning to his companion,
he changed the conversation. When all the company were occupied round
the furnaces, attending to the Englishman's experiments, Laniska went
back to the apartment where Sophia Mansfeld was at work. "My good girl,"
said he to her, "what is the matter with you? The overseer tells me,
that since you came here you have done nothing that is worth looking at;
yet this charming piece (pointing to a bowl of her painting, which had
been brought from Saxony) is of your design, is it not?"

"Yes, sir," replied Sophia, "I painted it--to my sorrow. If the king had
never seen or liked it, I should now be--" The recollection of her home,
which at this instant rushed full upon her mind, overpowered her, and
she paused.

"You would now be in Saxony," resumed Laniska; "but forget Saxony, and
you will be happy at Berlin."

"I cannot forget Saxony, sir," answered the young woman, with modest
firmness; "I cannot forget a father and mother whom I love, who are old
and infirm, and who depended on me for their support. I cannot forget
every thing--every body that I have ever loved: I wish I could."

"Sir," whispered a Prussian workman, who stood by--"sir, she has a
lover in Saxony, to whom she was just going to be married, when she was
carried off from her cottage, and brought hither."

"Cannot her lover follow her?" said Laniska.

"He is in Berlin, in concealment," replied the workman, in a whisper;
"you won't betray him, I am sure."

"Not I," said Laniska; "I never betrayed any one, and I never
shall--much less the unfortunate. But why is her lover in concealment?"

"Because it is the king's pleasure," replied the Prussian, "that she
should no longer consider him as her lover. You know, sir, several of
these Saxon women have been compelled, since their arrival at Berlin,
to marry Prussians. Sophia Mansfeld has fallen to the lot of a Prussian
soldier, who swears that if she delays another month to marry him, he
will complain to the king of her obstinacy. Our overseer, too, threatens
to complain of her idleness. She is ruined if she go on in this way: we
tell her so, but she seems to have lost all sense; for she sits as she
does now, like one stupified, half the day, let us say what we will to
her. We pity her; but the king knows best: the king must be obeyed."

"Slave!" exclaimed Laniska, bursting into a sudden transport of
indignation, "slave! you are fit to live only under a tyrant. The
king knows best! the king must be obeyed! What! when his commands are
contrary to reason, to justice, to humanity?" Laniska stopped short, but
not before the high tone of his voice, and the boldness of the words
he uttered, had astonished and dismayed all present,--all except Sophia
Mansfeld: her whole countenance became suddenly illuminated; she
started up, rushed forwards, threw herself at the feet of Laniska, and
exclaimed, "Save me! you can save me! you have courage; and you are a
powerful lord, and you can speak to the king. Save me from this detested
marriage!"

The party of gentlemen who had been in the next chamber now entered the
room, curious to know what had drawn thither such a crowd of workmen. On
seeing them enter, Sophia, recollecting herself, rose, and returned
to her work quietly; whilst Laniska, much agitated, seized hold of the
Englishman's arm, and hurried out of the manufactory.

"You are right, you are right," cried he, "Frederick is a tyrant! But
how can I save his victim?"

"Not by violence, my Augustus; not by violence!" replied a young man
of the name of Albert, who followed Laniska, anxious to restrain the
impetuosity of his friend's temper, with which he was well acquainted.
"By imprudence," said he, "you will but expose yourself to danger; you
will save, you will serve no one."

"Tame prudence will neither save nor serve any one, however it may
prevent its possessor from exposing _himself_ to danger," retorted
Laniska, casting upon Albert a look of contemptuous reproach. "Prudence
be your virtue,--courage mine."

"Are they incompatible?" said Albert, calmly.

"I know not," replied Laniska; "but this I know, that I am in no humour
to reason that point, or any other, according to all those cursed forms
of logic, which, I believe, you love better than any thing else."

"Not better than I love you, as I prove by allowing you to curse them
as much and as often as you think proper," replied Albert, with a smile,
which could not, however, force one from his angry friend.

"You are right to practise logic and rhetoric," resumed Laniska, "as
much and as often as you can, since in your profession you are to make
your bread by your tongue and your pen. I am a soldier, or soon to be a
soldier, and have other arms and other feelings."

"I will not dispute the superiority of your arms," replied Albert; "I
will only beg of you to remember, that mine will be at your service
whenever you want or wish for them."

This temperate and friendly reply entirely calmed Laniska. "What would
become of Augustus Laniska," said he, giving Albert his hand, "if he had
not such a friend as you are? My mother may well say this, as she does
ten times a-day; but now take it in your sober manner, what can we do
for this poor woman? for something must be done."

After some consideration, Albert and Laniska determined to draw up a
petition for Sophia, and to present it to the king, who was known to pay
ready and minute attention to every application made to him in writing,
even by the meanest of his subjects. The petition was presented, and an
answer anxiously expected. Frederick, when at Potzdam, often honoured
the Countess Laniska with a visit. She was a woman of considerable
information and literature, acquirements not common amongst the Polish
or Prussian ladies; and the king distinguished the countess by his
approbation, in order to excite some emulation amongst his female
subjects. She held a sort of _conversazione_ at her house, which was
frequented by all foreigners of distinction, and especially by some of
the French literati, who were at this time at Frederick's court.

One evening--it was a few days after Sophia Mansfeld's petition had been
presented--the king was at the Countess Laniska's, and the company were
conversing upon some literary subject, when Frederick, who had been
unusually silent, suddenly turned to the English traveller, who was one
of the company, and asked him whether his countryman, Mr. Wedgewood, had
not made a beautiful imitation of the Barberini, or Portland Vase?

The Englishman replied, that the imitation was so exquisite, as scarcely
to be known by the best judges from the original: and he went on,
with much eagerness, to give a description of the vase, that he might
afterward, for the honour of his country, repeat some lines written upon
the subject by an English poet{3}. Frederick was himself a poet, and a
judge of poetry; he listened to the lines with attention; and, as soon
as the Englishman had finished speaking, he exclaimed, "I will write a
description of the Prussian vase myself."

{Footnote 3: Darwin.--See his description of the Barberini vase in the
Botanic Garden. We hope our readers will pardon this anachronism.}

"The Prussian Vase!" said the English traveller: "I hope I may have the
honour of seeing it before I leave Berlin."

"If you prolong your stay another month, your curiosity will probably be
gratified," replied Frederick. "The Prussian Vase is not yet in being;
but I have this day determined to offer a reward, that I know will
produce a vase worthy of Prussia. Those who have the command of motives,
and know their power, have also the command of all that the arts, or
what is called a _genius_ for the arts, can produce. The human mind, and
human fingers, are much the same in Italy, in England, and in Prussia.
Then, why should not we have a Prussian as as well as a Wedgewood's or
a Barberini Vase? We shall see. I do not understand _mon métier de roi_,
if I cannot call forth talents where I know them to exist. There is,"
continued the king, fixing his eyes full upon Laniska, "there is, in my
porcelain manufactory at Berlin, a woman of considerable talents, who is
extremely anxious to return, along with some lovers of hers, to Saxony.
Like all other _prisoners of war_, she must purchase her liberty from
the conqueror; and if she cannot pay her ransom in gold, let her pay it
by her talents. I do not give premiums to idleness or obstinacy. _The
king must be obeyed, whether he knows how to command or not: let all
the world, who are able to judge, decide._" Frederick, as soon as he had
finished this speech, which he pronounced in a peremptory tone, left the
room; and Laniska's friend, who perceived that the imprudent words he
had uttered in Berlin had reached the king's ear, gave the young man up
for lost. To their surprise, however, the king took no further notice of
what had happened, but received Laniska the next day at Sans Souci with
all his usual kindness. Laniska, who was of an open, generous temper,
was touched by this conduct; and, throwing himself at Frederick's feet,
he exclaimed:--

"My king! forgive me, if in a moment of indignation I called you a
_tyrant_."

"My friend, you are yet a child, and I let children and fools speak of
me as they please," replied Frederick. "When you are an older man,
you will judge more wisely, or, at least, you will speak with more
discretion within twenty miles of a _tyrant's_ palace. Here is my answer
to your Sophia Mansfeld's petition," added he, giving Laniska the paper,
which Albert had drawn up; at the bottom of which was written, in the
king's own hand, these words:--

"I will permit the artist who shall produce, before this day month,
the most beautiful vase of Berlin china, to marry or not to marry,
whomsoever he or she shall think proper, and to return to Saxony with
all imaginable expedition. If the successful artist choose to remain at
Berlin, I will add a reward of 500 crowns. The artist's name shall be
inscribed on the vase, which shall be called the Prussian Vase." No
sooner had Sophia Mansfeld read these words, than she seemed animated
with new life and energy. She was likely to have many competitors; for,
the moment the king's intentions were made known in the manufactory, all
hands and heads were at work. Some were excited by the hope of regaining
their liberty; others stimulated by the mention of 500 crowns; and some
were fired with ambition to have their name inscribed on the Prussian
Vase. But none had so strong a motive for exertion as Sophia. She was
indefatigable. The competitors consulted the persons whom they believed
to have the best taste in Berlin and Potzdam. Sophia's designs were
shown, as soon as they were sketched, to the Countess Laniska, whose
advice was of material use to her.

At length, the day which was to decide her fate arrived. The vases were
all ranged, by the king's order, in his gallery of paintings at Sans
Souci; and in the evening, when Frederick had finished the business of
the day, he went thither to examine them. Laniska and some others were
permitted to accompany him: no one spoke, whilst Frederick was comparing
the works of the different competitors.

"Let this be the Prussian Vase," said the king. It was Sophia
Mansfeld's. Laniska just stayed to show her name, which was written
underneath the foot of the vase, and then he hurried away to communicate
the happy news to Sophia, who was waiting, with her lover, at the house
of the Countess Laniska, in Potzdam, impatient to hear her fate.
She heard it with inexpressible joy; and Laniska's generous heart
sympathized in her happiness. It was settled that she should the next
morning be married to her lover, and return with him to her father and
mother in Saxony. The happy couple were just taking leave of the young
count and his mother, when they were alarmed by the sound of many voices
on the great staircase. Some persons seemed to be disputing with the
countess's servants for admittance. Laniska went out to inquire into the
cause of the disturbance. The hall was filled with soldiers.

"Are you the young Count Laniska?" said an officer to him, the moment he
appeared.

"I _am_ the young Count Laniska," replied he, in a firm tone. "What do
you want with me? and why this disturbance in my mother's house at this
unseasonable hour?"

"We come here by the king's orders," replied the soldier. "Is not there
in this house a woman of the name of Sophia Mansfeld?"

"Yes," replied Laniska: "what do you want with her?"

"She must come with us; and you are our prisoner, count," replied the
soldier.

It was in vain to ask for further explanation. The soldiers could give
none; they knew nothing, but that their orders were to convey Sophia
Mansfeld immediately to Meissen in Saxony, and to lodge Count Laniska in
the castle of Spandau, a state prison.

"I must know my crime before I submit to punishment," cried Laniska,
in a passionate voice; but he restrained the natural violence of his
temper, on seeing his mother appear, and, at her request, yielded
himself up a prisoner without resistance, and without a murmur. "I
depend on your innocence, my son, and on the justice of the king," said
the countess; and she took leave of him without shedding a tear. The
next day, even before the king arrived at Potzdam, she went to the
palace, determined to wait there till she could see him, that she might
hear from his own lips the cause of her son's imprisonment. She waited
a considerable time--for, without alighting from horseback, Frederick
proceeded to the parade, where he was occupied for some hours; at length
he alighted, and the first person he saw, on entering his palace, was
the Countess Laniska.

"I am willing to believe, madam," said he, "that you have no share in
your son's folly and ingratitude."

"My son is, I hope, incapable of ingratitude, sir," answered the
countess, with an air of placid dignity. "I am well aware that he may
have been guilty of great imprudence."

"At six o'clock this evening let me see you, madam," replied the king,
"at Sans Souci, in the gallery of paintings, and you shall know of what
your son is accused."

At the appointed hour she was in the gallery of paintings at Sans Souci.
No one was there. She waited quietly for some time, then walked up and
down the gallery with extreme impatience and agitation; at last, she
heard the king's voice and his step; the door opened, and Frederick
appeared. It was an awful moment to the mother of Laniska. She stood in
silent expectation.

"I see, madam," said the king, after fixing his penetrating eye for some
moments on her countenance, "I see that you are, as I believe you to
be, wholly ignorant of your son's folly." As he spoke, Frederick put his
hand upon the vase made by Sophia Mansfeld, which was placed on a small
stand in the middle of the gallery. The countess, absorbed by her own
reflections, had not noticed it.

"You have seen this vase before," said the king; "and you have probably
seen the lines which are inscribed on the foot of it."

"Yes," said the countess, "they are my son's writing."

"And they are written by his own hand," said the king.

"They are. The poor Saxon woman who draws so admirably cannot write; and
my son wrote the inscription for her."

"The lines are in a high strain of _panegyric_," said the king; and he
laid a severe emphasis on the word _panegyric_.

"Whatever may be my son's faults," said the countess, "your majesty
cannot suspect him of being a base flatterer. Scarcely a month has
elapsed since his unguarded openness exposed him to your displeasure.
Your majesty's magnanimity, in pardoning his imprudent expressions,
convinced him at once of his error in having used them; and, in the fit
of enthusiasm with which your kindness upon that occasion inspired him,
he, who is by no means a poet by profession, composed the two lines of
_panegyric_ which seem to have given your majesty offence, but which I
should never have conceived could be the cause of his imprisonment."

"You plead like a mother, madam," said the king; "but you reason like a
woman. Have I ever said that your son was imprisoned for having written
two lines of flattery? No, madam: I know how to smile both at flattery
and satire, when they are undisguised; but there is a degree of baseness
which I cannot so easily pardon. Be patient, madam; I will listen to all
you can say in your son's defence, when you have read this inscription.
But, before you read it, understand that I was upon the point of sending
this vase to Paris. I had actually given orders to the man who was
packing up that case (pointing to a half-packed case of porcelain) to
put up the Prussian Vase as a present for a Prussian _bel esprit_ of
your acquaintance. The man showed me the inscription at the bottom
of the vase. I read the flattering lines with pleasure, and
thought them--as people usually think flattering lines made on
themselves--excellent. I was even fool enough immediately to consider
how I could reward the author, when my friend, the packer, interrupted
the course of my thoughts, by observing, with some exclamation of
astonishment, that the blue colour of the vase came off in one spot,
where he had been rubbing it. I looked, and saw that part of the
inscription at the bottom of the vase had been covered over with blue
paint. At first sight, I read the words, 'On the character of Frederick
the Great;' the blue paint had concealed the next word, which is
now, madam, sufficiently legible." The word to which the king pointed
was--_tyrant_. "Those flattering lines, madam, you comprehend, were
written--'On the character of Frederick, the great _tyrant_.'

"I shall spare you, madam, all the reflections I have made on this
occasion. _Tyrant_ as I am, I shall not punish the innocent mother for
the follies of her son. I shall be at your house, along with the rest of
your friends, on Tuesday evening."

The unhappy mother of Laniska withdrew from the presence of the king,
without attempting any reply. Her son's conduct admitted, she thought,
of no apology, if it were really true that he had written the words to
which his name was signed. Of this she doubted; but her consternation
was at first so great, that she had not the power to think. A general
belief remained in her mind of her son's innocence; but then a number of
his imprudent words and actions came across her memory; the inscription
was, apparently, in his own hand-writing. The conversation which had
passed in the porcelain manufactory at Berlin corroborated the idea
expressed in this inscription. The countess, on her return home, related
the circumstances, with as much composure as she could, to Albert, who
was waiting to hear the result of her interview with the king. Albert
heard her relation with astonishment; he could not believe in his
friend's guilt, though he saw no means of proving his innocence. He
did not, however, waste his time in idle conjectures, or more idle
lamentations: he went immediately to the man who was employed to pack up
the vase; and, after questioning him with great care, he went to Berlin
to the porcelain manufactory, and inquired whether any persons were
present when Laniska wrote the inscription for Sophia Mansfeld. After
Albert had collected all the information that could be obtained, his
persuasion of Laniska's innocence was confirmed.

On Tuesday Frederick had promised to come to the countess's
_conversazione_. The company, previous to his majesty's arrival, were
all assembled round the sofa, on which she was seated, and they were
eagerly talking over Laniska's affair. "What a blessing it is," cried
the English traveller, "to live in a country where no man can be
imprisoned without knowing of what he is accused! What a blessing it is
to live under a government where no man can be condemned without trial,
and where his trial must be carried on in open day, in the face of his
country, his peers, his equals!"--The Englishman was in the midst of
a warm eulogium upon the British mode of trial by jury, when Frederick
entered the room, as it was his custom, without being announced: and
the company were so intently listening to our traveller, they did not
perceive that the king was one of his auditors. "Would to Heaven," cried
the Countess Laniska, when the Englishman paused--"would to Heaven my
son could have the advantage of such a trial!"

"And would to Heaven," exclaimed Albert, "that I might plead his cause!"

"On one condition," said Frederick; and, at the sound of his voice,
every one started--"on one condition, young man, your prayer shall be
granted. You shall plead your friend's cause, upon condition that, if
you do not convince his judges of his innocence, you shall share his
punishment. His punishment will be a twelvemonth's imprisonment in the
castle of Spandau; and yours the same, if you fail to establish your
cause and his. Next to the folly of being imprudent ourselves, that of
choosing imprudent friends is the most dangerous. Laniska shall be
tried by his equals; and, since _twelve_ is the golden, harmonic, divine
number, for which justice has a blind predilection, let him have
twelve judges, and call them, if you please, a jury. But I will name my
counsel, and you counsel for Laniska. You know the conditions--do you
accept of them?"

"Willingly, sire!" cried Albert, joyfully. "You will permit me to have
access to the prisoner in the castle of Spandau?"

"That is a new condition; but I grant it. The governor shall have orders
to admit you to see and converse with his prisoner for two hours; but
if, after that conversation, your opinion of your friend should change,
you will not blame me if I hold you to your word."

Albert declared that he desired no more: and the Countess Laniska,
and all who were present, joined in praising Frederick's clemency and
Albert's generosity. The imprisonment of Laniska had been much talked
of, not only in public companies at Potzdam and at Berlin, but, what
affected Frederick much more nearly, it had become the subject of
conversation amongst the literati in his own palace at Sans Souci. An
English traveller, of some reputation in the literary world, also knew
the circumstances, and was interested in the fate of the young count.
Frederick seems to have had a strong desire to be represented in an
amiable point of view by writers who, he believed, could transmit his
fame to posterity. Careless of what might be _said_ of him, he was
anxious that nothing should be _printed_ derogatory to his reputation.
Whether the desire to give to foreigners a striking proof of his
magnanimity, or whether his regard for the young count, and his
friendship for his mother, were his motives in granting to Laniska this
_trial by jury_, cannot and need not be determined. Unmixed virtue is
not to be expected from kings more than from common men.

After his visit to the prisoner in the castle of Spandau, Albert felt no
inclination to recede from the agreement into which he had entered; but
Laniska was much alarmed when he was told of what had passed. "Oh, my
generous friend!" exclaimed the young count, "why did you accept of
the conditions offered to you by the king? You may--I am sure you
do--believe in my innocence; but you will never be able to prove it. You
will soon be involved in my disgrace."

"I shall think it no disgrace," replied Albert, "to be the
fellow-prisoner of an innocent friend."

"Do not you remember," said Laniska, "that, as we were returning
from Berlin, after my unlucky visit to the porcelain manufactory, you
promised me, that whenever I should be in want of your weapons, they
should be at my service? I little thought that I should so soon be in
such need of them. Farewell--I pray for their success."

On the day appointed for the trial of Laniska, crowds of people of all
ranks flocked to hear the proceedings. A spacious building in Potzdam,
intended for a barrack, was, upon this occasion, converted into a hall
of justice; a temporary gallery was erected for the accommodation of the
audience; and a platform was raised in the centre of the hall, where
the judge's chair was placed: on the right hand of his chair a space was
railed in for the reception of the twelve young gentlemen, who were to
act as jurors; on the left another space was railed in for spectators.
In the front there was a large table, on each side of which were benches
for the counsel and witnesses: those for the crown on the right hand;
those for the prisoner on the left. Every thing had, by the king's
orders, been prepared in this manner, according to the English custom.

The Countess Laniska now entered the court, with a few friends, who
had not yet forsaken her. They took their seats at the lower end of the
gallery; and as every eye turned upon the mother, who waited to hear the
trial of her son, an awful silence prevailed. This lasted but for a few
moments; it was succeeded by a general whispering amongst the crowds,
both in the hall and in the gallery. Each individual gave his opinion
concerning the event of the trial: some declared that the circumstances
which must appear against Laniska were so strong, that it was madness
in Albert to undertake his defence; others expressed great admiration of
Albert's intrepid confidence in himself and his friend. Many studied
the countenance of the king, to discover what his wishes might be; and
a thousand idle conjectures were formed from his most insignificant
movements.

At length, the temporary judge having taken his seat, twelve young
gentlemen were chosen, from the most respectable families in Potzdam,
to act as jurors. The prisoner was summoned to answer to the charges
brought against him, in the name of Frederick the Second, king of
Prussia. Laniska appeared, guarded by two officers: he walked up to the
steps of the platform with an air of dignity, which seemed expressive of
conscious innocence; but his countenance betrayed involuntary marks of
emotion, too strong for him to command, when, on raising his eyes, he
beheld his friend Albert, who stood full in his view. Albert maintained
an immovable composure of countenance. The prisoner was now asked
whether he had any objections to make to any of the twelve persons who
had been selected to judge his cause. He made none. They proceeded to
take an oath, "that, in their decision, they would suffer no motives to
influence them but a sense of truth and justice." The judge then rose,
and addressing himself to the jury, said:--

"Gentlemen,

"You are here, by the king's order, to form your opinions concerning the
guilt or innocence of the prisoner, commonly known by the name of Count
Augustus Laniska. You will learn the nature and circumstances of the
accusation against him from Mr. Warendorff, the gentleman on my right
hand, who in this cause has the honour of being counsel for his majesty.
You will hear from the gentleman on my left, Albert Altenburg, all that
can be said in defence of the prisoner, for whom he voluntarily offers
himself as counsel. After having listened to the arguments that may be
adduced, and to the witnesses that shall be examined on each side, you
are, gentlemen, according to the tenour of the oath which has just been
administered to you, to decide, without regard to any consideration but
truth and justice. Your opinion is to be delivered to me by the
eldest amongst you, and it is to be expressed in one or other of these
phrases--_guilty_ or _not guilty_.

"When I shall have heard your decision, I am, in his majesty's name, to
pronounce sentence accordingly. If the prisoner be judged by you _not
guilty_, I am to announce to him that he is thenceforward at liberty,
and that no stain affixes to his honour from the accusation that has
been preferred against him, or from his late imprisonment, or from this
public trial. If, on the contrary, your judgment shall be, that the
prisoner is _guilty_, I am to remand him to the castle of Spandau, where
he is to remain confined for twelve months from this day. To the
same punishment I am also to condemn Albert Altenburg, if he fail to
establish in your minds the innocence of the Count Laniska. It is upon
this condition that he is permitted to plead the cause of his friend.

"Gentlemen, you are called upon to give impartial attention in this
cause, by your duty to your king and to your country."

As soon as the judge, after making this short address to the jury, had
seated himself, Mr. Warendorff, counsel for the crown, rose, and spoke
in the following manner:--

"My lord, and gentlemen of the jury,

"It is with inexpressible concern that I find myself called upon to
plead in this cause. To be the accuser of any man is an invidious task:
to be the accuser of such a man as I once thought--as you perhaps still
think--the young Count Laniska must, to a person of generous feelings,
be in a high degree difficult and distressing. I do not pretend to more
generosity or delicacy of sentiment than others; but I beg any of
you, gentlemen, to imagine yourselves for a moment in my place, and to
conceive what must be my sensations as a man, and as an advocate. I am
not ignorant how popular the name of Augustus Laniska is, both in Berlin
and Potzdam. I am not ignorant that the young count has been in the
habit of living amongst you, gentlemen, on terms of familiarity,
friendship, and confidence; nor can I doubt that the graceful, manly
manner, and open deportment, for which he is so eminently distinguished,
must have strongly prepossessed you in his favour. I am not ignorant
that I have to plead against him before his friends, in the presence of
his mother--a mother respected even in a higher degree than her son is
beloved; respected for her feminine virtues--for her more than feminine
endowments; who, had she no other claim upon your hearts, must, by the
unfortunate situation in which she now appears, command your sympathy.

"You must all of you feel, likewise, strongly prepossessed in favour
of that noble-minded youth, who has undertaken to defend the prisoner's
cause, at the hazard of sharing his punishment. I respect the general
character of Albert Altenburg; I admire his abilities; I applaud him,
for standing forward in defence of his friend; I pity him, because
he has a friend, for whom, I fear, even he will find it impossible
to establish any plausible defence. But the idea that he is acting
handsomely, and that he has the sympathy of numbers in his favour, will
doubtless support the young advocate in his arduous task. He appears in
this court in the striking character of counsel, disinterested counsel,
for his friend.

"Gentlemen, I also appear in this court as counsel, disinterested
counsel for a friend. Yes, gentlemen, I am permitted to call Frederick
the Great _my friend_. He is not, as other great monarchs have been,
ambitious to raise himself above the sphere of humanity; he does not
desire to be addressed in the fulsome strains either of courtly or of
poetical adulation: he wishes not to be worshipped as a god, but to be
respected as a man{4}. It is his desire to have friends that shall
be faithful, or subjects that shall be obedient. Happy his obedient
subjects--they are secure of his protection: happy, thrice happy, his
faithful friends--they are honoured with his favour and his confidence.
It was in the power of the prisoner now before you to have been in
this enviable class. You all of you know that the Countess Laniska, his
mother, has for years been honoured by the friendship of her sovereign;
even the conduct of her son has not been able to shake his confidence in
her. A Pole by birth, Augustus Laniska was educated amongst the first of
the Prussian nobility, at the military academy at Potzdam, that
nursery of heroes. From such an education--from the son of such
a mother--honourable sentiments and honourable conduct were to
be expected. Most confidently were they expected by his king, who
distinguished the young count, as you all know, even in his boyish days.
The count is said to be of a temper naturally impetuous: the errors
into which such a temper too publicly betrayed him were pardoned by the
indulgence of his king. I am compelled to recall one recent instance of
the truth of these assertions, as it is immediately connected with the
present cause."

{Footnote 4: Æschylus.}

Here Mr. Warendorff related all that had passed at the porcelain
manufactory at Berlin, and the king's subsequent conduct towards
Count Laniska. On the magnanimity of his majesty, the eloquent counsel
expatiated for a considerable time; but the applauses with which this
part of his oration was received by a party in the gallery, who were
seated near the king, were so loud, as almost to drown the voice of the
orator, and effectually to distract the attention of those employed to
take down his words. When he could again be heard distinctly, he resumed
as follows:

"I am not surprised at these testimonies of admiration which burst from
the warm hearts of his majesty's subjects; I am only surprised that a
heart could be found in his dominions on whom such magnanimity could
make no impression. I am shocked, I am grieved, when I find such a heart
in the person of Count Laniska. Can it be believed that, in the course
of one short month after this generous pardon, that young nobleman
proved himself the basest of traitors--a traitor to the king, who
was his friend and benefactor? Daring no longer openly to attack, he
attempted secretly to wound the fame of his sovereign. You all of you
know what a degree of liberty, even licence, Frederick the Great permits
to that species of satirical wit with which the populace delight to
ridicule their rulers. At this instant there are various anonymous
pasquinades on the garden-gates at Sans Souci, which would have provoked
the resentment--the fatal resentment--of any other monarch upon earth.
It cannot be doubted that the authors of these things could easily be
discovered, if the king condescended to make any inquiries concerning
them: it cannot be doubted that the king has power to punish the
offenders: yet they remain untouched, perhaps unknown. Our sovereign
is not capable of feeling the petty emotions of vulgar spleen
or resentment; but he could not be insensible to the treacherous
ingratitude of one, whom he imagined to have been attached to him by
every tie of kindness and of duty. That the Count Laniska should choose
the instant when the king was showing him unusual favour, to make that
favour an instrument of his base malice, is scarcely credible. Yet,
Prussians, incredible as it sounds to us, it is true. Here are my
proofs: here are my witnesses."

Mr. Warendorff, at this instant, uncovered the Prussian Vase, and then
pointed to a Jew, and to the master of the porcelain manufactory, who
stood beside him, ready to give their evidence. We omit that part of
Mr. Warendorff's speech which contained the facts that have been already
related. The Prussian Vase was handed to the jury: the verses in praise
of Frederick the Great were read, and the word _tyrant_ was seen,
afterward, with the utmost surprise. In the midst of the general
indignation, Mr. Warendorff called upon the Jew to come forward and
give his evidence. This Jew was an old man, and there was something
remarkable in his looks. His head was still; his neck was stiff; but
his eyes moved with incessant celerity from side to side, and he seemed
uneasy at not being able to see what was passing behind him: there was
a certain firmness in his attitude, but his voice trembled when he
attempted to speak. All these circumstances prepossessed Laniska's
friends against the Jew the moment he appeared; and it was justly
observed, that his having the misfortune to be a Jew was sufficient
to prejudice many of the populace against him, even before a word he
uttered reached their ears. But impartial spectators judged that the
poor man was only terrified at being called upon to speak in so large an
assembly. Solomon (for that was the name of the Jew), after having taken
an oath upon the Talmud that he would speak nothing but the truth, made
the following answers to the questions put to him by Mr. Warendorff:--

_Mr. Warendorff_.--"Did you ever see this vase before?"

_Solomon_.--"Yes."

_Mr. Warendorff_.--"Where? when? Tell all you know about it to the
gentlemen of the jury."

_Solomon_.--"The first time I saw that vase was in the gallery of
paintings, at the king's palace of Sans Souci; to the best of my
recollection, it was on the night of the first day of the month, about
ten o'clock, or, perhaps, it might be eleven: I wish to be exact; but I
cannot be certain as to the hour precisely."

_Mr. Warendorff_.--"The exact hour is not of any consequence: proceed.
Tell us how you came to see this vase. Take your time to speak. We are
in no hurry: the truth will appear sooner or later."

_Solomon_.--"His majesty himself put the vase into my hands, and
commanded me to pack it up, with some other china, which he was going to
send as a present to a gentleman at Paris. I am something of a judge of
china myself, being used to selling small pieces of it up and down the
town and country. So I was struck with the first sight of this
beautiful vase; I looked at it very carefully, and wiped away, with my
handkerchief, the dust which had settled on the white figures: here is
the very handkerchief. I wiped the vase all over; but, when I came
to rub the bottom, I stopped to read the verses _on the character of
Frederick the Great_; and having read these, I rubbed the white letters
quite clean: the ground on which they were written was blue. I found
that some of the blue colour came off upon my handkerchief, which
surprised me a good deal. Upon examining further, I perceived that the
colour came off only in one spot, of about an inch long, and half an
inch broad. The king was at this time standing with his back to me,
looking at a new picture which had just been hung up in the gallery;
but hearing me make an exclamation ('_Father Abraham!_' I believe it was
that I said), his majesty turned round. 'What is the matter with you,
Solomon? You look wondrous wise,' his majesty was pleased to say. 'Why
do you call on Father Abraham at this time of day? Do you expect that he
will help you to pack up that china--hey, Solomon, my friend?' I had
no power to answer this question, for by this time, to my utter
astonishment, I had discovered that, on the spot where I had rubbed off
the blue paint, there was a word written--the word was _tyrant_. '_On
the character of Frederick, the great tyrant!_' Said I to myself--'what
can this mean?' The king snatched the vase from my hands, read what I
had read, saw the paint which had been rubbed off upon my handkerchief,
and without saying one word left the gallery. This is all I know about
the matter."

The Jew bowed to the court, and Mr. Warendorff told him that, having
closed his evidence, he might depart. But Albert rose to desire that the
judge would order him to remain in court, as he purposed to examine,
or, according to the English term, to _cross-examine_ him further, at
a proper time. The judge ordered the Jew to remain in court. The
next witness called, on the part of the crown, was the master of
the porcelain manufactory of Berlin; to whom Mr. Warendorff put the
following questions:--

_Q_.--"Have you seen the verses which are inscribed on the foot of this
vase?"

_Answer_.--"Yes, I have."

_Q_.--"Do you recollect what words are written over the verses?"

_Answer_.--"I do: the words are--'On the character of Frederick, the
great tyrant.'"

_Q_.--"Do you know by whom those words and these verses were written?"

_Answer_.--"I believe that they were written by Count Augustus Laniska."

_Q_.--"How do you know? or why do you believe it?"

_Answer_.--"I was present when Sophia Mansfeld, the woman by whom the
vase was designed, told the count that she did not know how to write,
and that she would be obliged to him if he would write the inscription
himself on it. The vase at this time had not been put into the furnace.
It was in what we call biscuit. The Count Laniska took a proper tool,
and said that he would write the inscription as she desired. I saw
him writing on the bottom of the vase for some minutes. I heard him
afterward call to one of the workmen, and desire that he would put the
vase into the furnace: the workman accordingly carried it into the next
room to the furnace, as I believe."

_Q_.--"Did you see the inscription on the vase after it was taken out of
the furnace? and was the word 'tyrant' then on it?"

_Answer_.--"I did not see the vase immediately upon its being taken out
of the furnace; but I saw it about an hour afterward. At that time I
read the inscription: the word 'tyrant' was not then visible on the
vase; the place where it now appears was blue. I carried it myself,
along with some others, to the king's palace at Sans Souci. The night of
the first day of this month his majesty sent for me, and showed me the
word _tyrant_ on the vase: I had never seen it there till then. It
could not have been written after the china was baked: it must have been
written whilst the biscuit was soft; and it must have been covered
over with the blue paint after the vase was taken out of the furnace. I
believe the word was written by Count Laniska, because I saw nobody
else write upon the vase but him; because the word exactly resembles the
handwriting of the rest of the inscription; and because I, upon a former
occasion, heard the count make use of that very word in speaking of
Frederick the Great."

Here the master of the porcelain manufactory finished speaking, and was
going, with Mr. Warendorff's permission, to retire; but Albert signified
his intention to cross-examine him also, and the judge commanded that
he should remain in court. The two next witnesses who were produced and
examined were the workman who carried the vase to the furnace, and the
man whose business it was to put the biscuit into the furnace. Neither
of these witnesses could write or read. The workman deposed, that he
carried the Prussian Vase, as he was desired, to the furnace; that no
one touched it on the way thither. The man whose business it was to put
the biscuit into the furnace swore that he put it along with several
other vases into the furnace; that he attended the fire, and that no one
touched any of them till they were baked and taken out by him. Here the
evidence for the prosecution closed. Mr. Warendorff observed, that he
should forbear to expatiate further upon the conduct of the prisoner;
that he had been ordered by his sovereign to speak of him with all
possible moderation; that he earnestly hoped the defence that should be
made for Count Laniska might be satisfactory; and that the mode of trial
which had been granted to him by the king was a sufficient proof of the
clemency of his majesty, and of his earnest desire to allow the prisoner
every possible means of re-establishing his character in the eyes of
the public. Albert now rose. The Count Laniska, who had appeared unmoved
during Mr. Warendorff's oration, changed countenance the moment Albert
rose in his defence; the Countess Laniska leaned forward over the rails
of the gallery in breathless anxiety: there was no sound heard in the
whole gallery, except the jingling of the chain of the king's sword,
with which he was playing.

"I shall not attempt, gentlemen," said Albert, "to move your sympathy
by a pathetic description of my own feelings _as a man, and as an
advocate_. Whatever mine may be, it is my wish and my duty to repress
them. I have need of that calm possession of my understanding, which
will be necessary to convince yours of the innocence of my friend.
To convince is my object. If it were in my power, I should, upon
the present occasion, disdain to persuade. I should think it equally
incompatible with my own honour and that of the Count Laniska. With
these sentiments, I refrain, Prussians, from all eulogium upon the
magnanimity of your king. Praises from a traitor, or from the advocate
of a traitor, must be unworthy of a great monarch, or of a generous
people. If the prisoner before you shall be proved to be no traitor, he
will doubtless have opportunities of expressing by actions, better than
I can by words, his gratitude to his sovereign, for having allowed him
this public trial by his equals--men who are able to discern and to
assert the truth. It cannot have escaped their observation, that no
positive evidence whatever has yet been produced against the prisoner.
No one has yet been heard to swear that he _saw_ Count Laniska write the
word _tyrant_ upon this vase. The first witness, Solomon the Jew, has
informed us of what our senses could not leave us room to doubt, that
the word is actually engraved upon the porcelain: further, he has told
us that it was covered over with blue paint, which he rubbed off with
his handkerchief. All this may be true; but the wisdom of Solomon,
united to that of Baron Warendorff, has failed to point out to us any
certain connexion between this blue paint, this handkerchief, and
the supposed guilt of the Count Laniska. The master of the porcelain
manufactory came next, and I apprehended that, as being a more
respectable witness than the Jew, it was reserved for him to supply
this link in the chain of evidence. But this respectable witness simply
swore, that he heard a woman say she could not write or read; that she
asked Count Laniska to write an inscription upon a vase for her; that,
in consequence of this request, the count wrote something upon the vase,
he does not pretend to know what; but he believes that the word _tyrant_
must have been one of the words then written by the count, because he
saw no one else write on the vase; because the hand-writing of that word
resembles the rest of the inscription; and because the count, in his
hearing, had, upon a former occasion, made use of the same expression in
speaking of the king. I recapitulate this evidence, to show that it is
in no part _positive_: that it all rests upon circumstances. In order to
demonstrate to you that the word in question could not have been written
by any person but Laniska, two witnesses are produced--the workman who
carried the vase to the furnace, and he who put it into the fire. The
one has positively sworn that no person touched the vase on the way to
the furnace. The other as positively swears that no one meddled with the
vase after it was put into the furnace.

"It is granted that the word could not have been engraved after the
biscuit was baked. The witness, however, has not sworn, or asserted,
that there was no interval of time between his receiving the vase and
his putting it into the fire. What became of it during this interval?
How long did it last? Will the witness swear that no one touched it
during this interval?

"These are questions which I shall put to him presently. I hope I have
established my first assertion, that you have no _positive_ evidence of
the prisoner's guilt.

"You well know, gentlemen, that where positive evidence of any supposed
fact cannot be produced, our judgments must be decided by the balance
of _probabilities_; and it is for this reason that the study of
probabilities, and the power of comparing them, has, in a late
celebrated essay, been called _the Science of Judges_.{5} To you, judges
of my friend, all the probabilities of his supposed guilt have been
stated. Weigh and compare them with those which I shall produce
in favour of his innocence. His education, his character, his
understanding, are all in his favour. The Count Laniska must be much
below the common standard of human virtue and capacity, if, without any
assignable motive, he could have committed an action at once so base
and so absurd as this of which he is accused. His temper is naturally or
habitually open and impetuous, even to extreme imprudence. An instance
of this imprudence, and of the manner in which it was pardoned by the
king, has been stated to you. Is it probable that the same man should be
both ingenuous and mean? Is it probable that the generosity with which
he was treated made no impression upon his heart? His heart must, upon
this supposition, be selfish and unfeeling. Look up, gentlemen, towards
that gallery--look at that anxious mother! those eager friends! Could
Laniska's fate excite such anxiety, if he were selfish and unfeeling?
Impossible! But, suppose him destitute of every generous sentiment, you
cannot imagine Count Laniska to be a fool. You have been lately reminded
that he was early distinguished for his abilities by a monarch, whose
penetration we cannot doubt. He was high in the favour of his sovereign:
just entering upon life--a military life; his hopes of distinction
resting entirely upon the good opinion of his general and his king: all
these fair expectations he sacrifices--for what? for the pleasure--but
it could be no pleasure--for the folly of writing a single word. Unless
the Count Laniska be supposed to have been possessed with an insane
desire of writing the word _tyrant_, how can we account for his writing
it upon this vase? Did he wish to convey to France the idea, that
Frederick the Great is a tyrant? A man of common sense could surely have
found, at least, safer methods of doing so than by engraving it as his
opinion upon a vase which he knew was to pass through the hands of the
sovereign whom he purposed thus treacherously to insult. The extreme
improbability that any man in the situation, with the character, habits,
and capacity of Count Laniska, should have acted in this manner amounts,
in my judgment, almost to a _moral impossibility_. I knew nothing more,
gentlemen, of this cause, when I first offered to defend Laniska at
the hazard of my liberty: it was not merely from the enthusiasm of
friendship that I made this offer; it was from the sober conviction
of my understanding, founded upon the accurate calculation of moral
probabilities.

{Footnote 5: Voltaire--Essai sur les Probabilités en fait de Justice.}

"It has been my good fortune, gentlemen, in the course of the inquiries
which I have since made, to obtain further confirmation of my opinion.
Without attempting any of that species of oratory which may be necessary
to cover falsehood, but which would encumber instead of adorning truth,
I shall now, in the simplest manner in my power, lay the evidence before
the court."

The first witness Albert called was the workman who carried the vase to
the man at the furnace. Upon his cross-examination, he said that he did
not deliver the vase into the hands of the man at the furnace, but that
he put it, along with several other pieces, upon a tray, on a table,
which stood near the furnace.

_Albert_.--"You are certain that you put it upon a tray?"

_Witness_.--"Quite certain."

_Albert_.--"What reason have you for remembering that circumstance
particularly?"

_Witness_.--"I remember it, because I at first set this vase upon the
ledge of the tray, and it was nearly falling. I was frightened at that
accident, which makes me particularly remember the thing. I made room
upon the tray for the vase, and left it quite safe upon the tray: I am
positive of it."

_Albert_.--"That is all I want with you, my good friend."

The next witness called was the man whose business it was to put the
vases into the furnace.

_Albert_.--"Did you see the witness who was last examined put this vase
upon a tray when he left it under your care?"

_Witness_.--"I did."

_Albert_.--"You are certain that he put it _upon the tray?_ What reason
have you to remember that circumstance particularly?"

_Witness_.--"I remember it, because I heard the witness cry out, 'There,
William, I had like to have thrown down this cursed vase; but, look you
here, I've left it quite safe upon the tray.' Upon this, I turned
and looked, and saw that vase standing upon the tray, safe, with some
others."

_Albert_.--"Do you recollect any thing else that passed?"

_Witness_.--"Only that the witness told me I must put it--the vase, I
mean--into the furnace directly; and I answered to that, 'All in good
time; the furnace is not ready yet; it will go in along with the rest.'"

_Albert_.--"Then you did not put it into the furnace immediately after
it was left with you?"

_Witness_.--"No, I did not--but that was not my fault--I could not; the
furnace was not hot enough."

_Albert_.--"How long do you think it was, from the time it was left upon
the tray, till you put it into the furnace?"

_Witness_.--"I don't know--I can't be positive: it might be a quarter
of an hour, or twenty minutes; or it might be half an hour. I cannot be
positive, sir; I cannot be positive."

_Albert_.--"You need not be positive. Nobody wants you to be positive.
Nobody wants to entrap you, my good friend. During this quarter of an
hour, or twenty minutes, or half an hour, that you speak of, did you
ever lose sight of this vase?"

_Witness_.--"To be sure I did. I did not stand watching it all the
while. Why should I? It was safe enough."

_Albert_.--"Do you recollect where you found the vase when you took it
to put it into the furnace?"

_Witness_.--"Yes: it was standing as it might be here, in the middle of
the table."

_Albert_.--"Do you recollect whether it was standing _upon_ the tray or
not?"

_Witness_.--"It was not _upon_ the tray, as I recollect: no, I'm sure it
was not, for I carried to the furnace first the tray and all that was on
it, and then I remember, I came back for this, which was standing, as I
said before, as it might be here, in the middle of the table."

_Albert_.--"Was any body, except yourself, at the furnace, or in the
room, from the time that this vase was brought to you, till you put it
into the furnace?"

_Witness_.--"Not as I remember. It was our dinner-time. All the men,
except myself, were gone to dinner: I stayed to mind the furnace."

_Albert_.--"It was you, then, that took this vase off the tray, was it?"

_Witness_.--"No, it was not. I never took it off the tray. I told you it
was not upon the tray with the others; I told you it was upon the table,
as it might be here."

_Albert_.--"Yes, when you were going to put it into the furnace, you
said that you saw it standing in the middle of the table; but you
recollect that you saw the workman who brought it put it upon the tray.
You told us you remembered that circumstance perfectly."

_Witness_.--"Yes, so I do."

_Albert_.--"The vase could not have got off the tray of itself. You did
not take it off. How came it off, do you think?"

_Witness_.--"I don't know. I can't tell. Somebody, to be sure, must
have taken it off. I was minding the furnace. My back was to the door. I
don't recollect seeing any body come in; but many might have come in and
out, without my heeding them."

_Albert_.--"Take your own time, my good friend. Recollect yourself;
perhaps you may remember."

_Witness_.--"Oh, yes, now you put me upon recollecting, I do remember
that Solomon the Jew came in, and asked me where Sophia Mansfeld was;
and it certainly must have been he who took the vase off the tray; for
now I recollect, as I looked round once from the furnace, I saw him with
it in his hand; he was looking at the bottom of it, as I remember: he
said, here are some fine verses, or some such thing; but I was minding
the furnace. That's all I know about the matter."

_Albert_.--"That is enough."

The next witness who came forward was the husband of Sophia
Mansfeld.--He deposed, that on the 29th of April, the day on which the
Prussian Vase was finished, as stated by the former evidence, and sent
to be put into the furnace, he met Sophia Mansfeld in the street: she
was going home to dinner. He asked to see the vase: she said that it
was, she believed, put into the furnace, and that he could not then see
it; that she was sorry he had not come sooner, for that he could have
written the inscription on it for her, and that would have spared her
the shame of telling Count Laniska that she could not read or write.
She added, that the count had written all that was wanting for her. The
witness, being impatient to see the vase, went as fast as he could to
the manufactory, in hopes of getting a sight of it before it was put
into the furnace. He met Solomon the Jew at the door of the manufactory,
who told him that he was too late, that all the vases were in the
furnace; he had just seen them put in. The Jew, as the witness now
recollects, though it did not strike him at the time, was eager to
prevent him from going into the furnace-room. Solomon took him by the
arm, and walked with him up the street, talking to him of some money
which he was to remit to Meissen, to Sophia Mansfeld's father and
mother.

_Albert_ asked the witness on whose account this money was to be
remitted by the Jew to Meissen.

_Witness_.--"The money was to be remitted on Sophia Mansfeld's account."

_Albert_.--"Did she borrow it from the Jew?"

_Witness_.--"No; the Jew owed it to her for work done by her. She had
the art of painting on glass. She had painted some glasses for a large
magic lantern, and several small pictures on glass. She did these things
at the hours when she was not obliged to be at the manufactory. She rose
very early in the morning and worked hard. She sold her work to the Jew
upon condition that he would remit the price agreed upon to her father
and mother, who were old, and depended on her for support."

_Albert_.--"Was the money punctually remitted to her father and mother
by the Jew?"

_Witness_.--"Not a farthing of it was remitted by him, as Sophia
discovered since her return to Meissen."

_Albert_.--"Did you ever hear this Jew say any thing about Sophia
Mansfeld's returning to Saxony?"

_Witness_.--"Yes; I once heard the Jew say that he hoped she never would
leave Berlin, because she was of great use to him. He advised me to
settle in Berlin. This passed about six weeks ago. About a week before
the prize was decided by the king, I met the Jew, and told him Sophia
had good hopes of getting back to Saxony. He looked very much vexed, and
said, 'She is not sure of that.'"

_Albert_.--"Did you ever hear this Jew speak of Count Laniska?"

_Witness_.--"Yes, about two months ago I saw him in the street when I
was speaking to Solomon, and I asked the Jew who he was. He answered,
'He is the Count Laniska--a man that I hate, and on whom I will be
revenged some time or other.' I asked why he hated the count. The Jew
replied, 'Because the Christian dog has made the corps of Jews his
laughing-stock. This day, when my son was going through his manual
exercise before the king, Count Laniska was holding his sides with
laughter. I'll be revenged upon him some time or other.'"

_Albert_.--"I have no occasion, sir, to trouble you with any farther
questions."

The next witness who appeared was a druggist of Berlin. He deposed,
that, on the 30th of April, Solomon the Jew came to his shop and asked
for blue paints; that, after trying the colours very carefully upon the
back of a letter, which he took out of his pocket, he bought a small
quantity of a shade of blue, which the witness produced in court.

Albert ordered that the paint should be handed to the gentlemen of the
jury, that they might compare it with the blue ground of the Prussian
Vase. With this it was found, upon comparison, to match exactly.

_Albert to the druggist_.--"Do you know what became of the paper upon
which you say the Jew tried your colours?"

_Witness_.--"Yes; here it is. I found it under the counter, after the
Jew went away, and I kept it to return to him, as I saw there was an
account on the other side of the paper, which I imagined he might want.
He never happened to call at my shop afterwards, and I forgot that I had
such a paper, till you, sir, called upon me about a week ago, to make
inquiry on this subject. You desired me to keep the paper carefully, and
not to let any one know that it was in my possession, till the day on
which the trial of Count Laniska was to come on. I have complied with
your request, and here is the paper."

The paper was handed to the jury; and one of the shades of blue exactly
matched that of the ground of the Prussian Vase. Albert now called upon
the Jew to produce, once more, the handkerchief with which he had rubbed
off the paint. The chain of evidence was now complete, for the blue on
the handkerchief was precisely the same as the colours on the paper
and on the vase. After the jury had satisfied themselves of this
resemblance, Albert begged that they would read what was written upon
the paper. The first thing that struck their eyes was the word _tyrant_
frequently repeated, as if by some one who had been practising to write
different hands. One of these words was an exact resemblance of the word
_tyrant_ on the Prussian Vase; and Albert pointed out a circumstance,
which had till now escaped attention, that the letter _r_, in this word,
was made differently from all the _ars_ in the rest of the inscription.
The writing of the Count Laniska had, in every other respect, been
successfully imitated.

After Albert had shown these things to the jury, he here closed the
evidence in favour of the prisoner, observing, that the length of time
which the trial had lasted seemed to have somewhat fatigued both the
judge and jury; and, knowing that it was now their usual hour of dinner,
he prudently forbore to make a long speech upon the evidence which had
been laid before them in favour of his friend: he left it to their own
understandings to determine the balance of probabilities between the
honour of Count Laniska and the honesty of Solomon the Jew.

The judge, in a manner which would have done honour even to the English
bench, summed up the evidence on both sides, and gave a distinct and
impressive charge to the jury, who, without leaving the court, gave a
verdict in favour of the prisoner. Loud acclamations filled the hall. In
the midst of these acclamations, the word--"Silence!" was pronounced
by that voice which never failed to command instantaneous obedience in
Prussia. All eyes turned upon the monarch.

"This court is now dissolved," said his majesty. "My judgment confirms
the verdict of the jury. Count Laniska, I took your sword from you too
hastily. Accept of mine in its stead." And as he pronounced these words,
Frederick ungirded his sword, and presented it to the young count. "As
for you, sir," continued the king, addressing himself to Albert, "you
want no _sword_ for the defence of your friends. Your arms are superior
to ours. Let me engage them in my service; and, trust me, I shall not
leave them long unemployed, or unrewarded."

There was but one person present to whom this speech seemed to give no
satisfaction. This person was Solomon the Jew, who stood apart, waiting
in black silence to learn his own fate. He was sentenced, not to a
year's imprisonment in the castle of Spandau, but to sweep the streets
of Potzdam (including the court in front of Count Laniska's palace) for
a twelvemonth.

After having heard this sentence, which was universally approved of, the
spectators began to retire.

The king dined--it is always important to know where great men
dine--Frederick the Great dined this day at the Countess Laniska's,
in company with her son, his friend Albert, and the English traveller.
After dinner, the king withdrew to attend parade; and it was observed
that he wore the Count Laniska's sword.

"You will allow," said the countess to the English traveller, "that our
king is a great man; for none but great men can bear to acknowledge that
they have been mistaken."

"You will allow, madam," replied the Englishman, "that it was our
English trial by jury which convinced the king of his mistake."

"And you applaud him for granting that trial," said Albert.

"To a certain degree I do," said the Englishman, from whom it was
difficult to extort praise of a despotic king--"to a certain degree, I
do; but you will observe, that this trial by jury, which is a matter of
favour to you Prussians, is a matter of right to us Englishmen. Much as
I admire your king of Prussia, I admire our English constitution more."



THE GOOD AUNT

Charles Howard was left an orphan when he was very young. His father
had dissipated a large fortune, and lost his life in a duel, about some
_debt of honour_, which had been contracted at the gaming-table. Without
fortune and without friends, this poor boy would probably have lived
and died in wretchedness, but for the humanity of his good aunt, Mrs.
Frances Howard. This lady possessed a considerable fortune, which, in
the opinion of some of her acquaintance, was her highest merit: others
respected her as the branch of an ancient family: some courted her
acquaintance because she was visited by the best company in town: and
many were ambitious of being introduced to her, because they were
sure of meeting at her house several of those distinguished literary
characters who throw a radiance upon all who can contrive to get within
the circle of their glories. Some few, some very few of Mrs. Howard's
acquaintance, admired her for her real worth, and merited the name of
friends.

She was a young and cheerful woman when she first undertook the
education of her little nephew. She had the courage to resist the
allurements of dissipation, or all that by her sex are usually thought
allurements. She had the courage to apply herself seriously to the
cultivation of her understanding: she educated herself, that she might
be able to fulfil the important duty of educating a child. Hers was not
the foolish fondness of a foolish aunt; she loved her nephew, and she
wished to educate him, so that her affection might increase, instead of
diminishing, as he grew up. By associating early pleasure with reading,
little Charles soon became fond of it: he was never forced to read books
which he did not understand; his aunt used, when he was very young, to
read aloud to him any thing entertaining that she met with; and whenever
she perceived by his eye that his attention was not fixed, she stopped.
When he was able to read fluently to himself, she selected for him
passages from books, which she thought would excite his curiosity to
know _more_; and she was not in a hurry to cram him with knowledge, but
rather anxious to prevent his growing appetite for literature from being
early satiated. She always encouraged him to talk to her freely about
what he read, and to tell her when he did not like any of the books
which she gave him. She conversed with him with so much kindness and
cheerfulness; she was so quick at perceiving his latent meaning; and she
was so gentle and patient when she reasoned with him, that he loved to
talk to her better than to any body else; nor could little Charles ever
thoroughly enjoy any pleasure without her sympathy.

The conversation of the sensible, well-informed people who visited Mrs.
Howard contributed to form her nephew's taste. A child may learn as much
from conversation as from books--not so many historic facts, but as much
instruction. Greek and Latin were the grand difficulties. Mrs. Howard
did not understand Greek and Latin; nor did she, though a woman, set too
high or too low a value upon the learned languages. She was convinced
that a man might be a great scholar without being a man of sense; she
was also persuaded that a man of sense might be a good scholar. She knew
that, whatever abilities her nephew might possess, he could not be upon
a footing with other men in the world, without possessing that species
of knowledge which is universally expected from gentlemen, as an
essential proof of their having received a liberal education; nor did
she attempt to undervalue the pleasures of classic taste merely because
she was not qualified to enjoy them: she was convinced, by the testimony
of men of candour and judgment, that a classical taste is a source of
real enjoyment, and she wished her nephew's literary pleasures to have
as extensive a range as possible.

To instruct her nephew in the learned languages, she engaged a good
scholar and a man of sense: his name--for a man is nothing without a
name--was Russell{1}. Little Charles did not at first relish Latin;
he used sometimes to come from his Latin lessons with a very dull,
stupified face, which gradually brightened into intelligence, after he
had talked for a few minutes with his aunt. Mrs. Howard, though pleased
to perceive that he was fond of her, had not the weakness to sacrifice
his permanent advantage to her transient gratification. One evening
Charles came running up-stairs to his aunt, who was at tea; several
people happened to be present. "I have done with Mr. Russell, and my
Latin, ma'am, thank goodness--now may I have the elephant and the camel,
or the bear and her cubs, that you marked for me last night?"

{Footnote 1: RUSSELL.--This name is chosen for that of a good tutor,
because it was the name of Mr. Edgeworth's tutor, at Oxford: Mr. Russell
was also tutor to the late Mr. Day. Both by Mr. Day and Mr. Edgeworth he
was respected, esteemed, and beloved, in no common degree.}

The company laughed at this speech of Charles: and a silly lady--for
even Mrs. Howard could not make all her acquaintance wise--a silly lady
whispered to Charles, "I've a notion, if you'd tell the truth, now, that
you like the bear and her cubs a great deal better than you do Latin and
Mr. Russell."

"I like the bear a great deal better than I do Latin, to be sure," said
the boy; "but as for Mr. Russell--why, I think," added he, encouraged by
the lady's smiles, "I think I like the bear better than Mr. Russell."

The lady laughed affectedly at this sally.

"I am sure," continued Charles, fancying that every person present was
delighted with his wit, "I am sure, at any rate, I like the learned pig
fifty times better than Mr. Russell!"

The judicious lady burst into a second fit of laughter. Mrs. Howard
looked very grave. Charles broke from the lady's caresses, and going up
to his aunt, timidly looking up in her face, said, "Am I a fool?"

"You are but a child," said Mrs. Howard; and, turning away from him, she
desired the servant, who waited at tea, to let Mr. Russell know that
she desired the _honour_ of his company. Mrs. Holloway--for that was the
silly lady's name--at the words, "honour of his company," resumed her
gravity, but looked round to see what the rest of the company thought.

"Give me leave, Mr. Russell," said Mrs. Howard, as soon as he came into
the room, "to introduce you to a gentleman, for whose works I know you
have a great esteem." The gentleman was a celebrated traveller, just
returned from abroad, whose conversation was as much admired as his
writings.

The conversation now took a literary turn. The traveller being polite,
as well as entertaining, drew out Mr. Russell's knowledge and abilities.
Charles now looked up to his tutor with respect. Children have
sufficient penetration to discover the opinions of others by their
countenance and manner, and their sympathy is quickly influenced by the
example of those around them. Mrs. Howard led the traveller to speak
of what he had seen in different countries--of natural history--of
the beaver, and the moose-deer, and the humming-bird, that is scarcely
larger than a bumble bee; and the mocking-bird, that can imitate the
notes of all other birds. Charles _niched_ himself into a corner of the
sofa upon which the gentlemen were sitting, and grew very attentive. He
was rather surprised to perceive that his tutor was as much entertained
with the conversation as he was himself.

"Pray, sir," said Mrs. Howard to the traveller, "is it true that the
humming-bird is a passionate little animal? Is the story told by the
author of the Farmer's Letters true?"

"What story?" said Charles, eagerly.

"Of a humming-bird that flew into a fury with a flower, and tore it to
pieces, because it could not get the honey out of it all at once."

"Oh, ma'am," said little Charles, peeping over his tutor's shoulders,
"will you show me that? Have you got the book, _dear_ aunt?"

"It is Mr. Russell's book," said his aunt.

"Your book!" cried Charles: "what, and do you know all about animals,
and those sorts of entertaining things, as well as Latin? And can
you tell me, then, what I want very much to know, how they catch the
humming-bird?"

"They shoot it."

"Shoot it! but what a large hole they must make in its body and
beautiful feathers! I thought you said its whole body was no bigger than
a bee--a humble bee."

"They make no hole in its body--they shoot it without ruffling even its
feathers."

"How, how?" cried Charles, fastening upon his tutor, whom he now
regarded no longer as a mere man of Latin.

"They charge the gun with water," said Mr. Russell, "and the poor little
humming-bird is stunned by the discharge."

The conversation next turned upon the entertaining chapter on instinct,
in Dr. Darwin's Zoonomia. Charles did not understand all that was said,
for the gentlemen did not address themselves to him. He never listened
to what he did not understand: but he was very quick at hearing whatever
was within the limits of his comprehension. He heard of the tailor-bird,
that uses its long bill as a needle, to sew the dead and the living
leaf together, of which it makes its light nest, lined with feathers and
gossamer: of the fish called the 'old soldier,' that looks out for the
empty shell of some dead animal, and fits this armour upon himself: of
the Jamaica spider, that makes himself a house under ground, with a door
and hinges, which door the spider and all the members of his family take
care to shut after them, whenever they go in and out.

Little Charles, as he sat eagerly attentive in his corner of the sofa,
heard of the trumpet of the common gnat{2}, and of its proboscis, which
serves at once for an awl, a saw, and a pump.

{Footnote 2: St. Pierre, Études de la Nature.}

"Are there any more such things," exclaimed Charles, "in these books?"

"A great many," said Mr. Russell.

"I'll read them all," cried Charles, starting up--"may I? may not I,
aunt?"

"Ask Mr. Russell," replied his aunt: "he who is obliged to give you the
pain of learning what is tiresome, should have the pleasure of rewarding
you with entertaining books. Whenever he asks me for Dr. Darwin and
St. Pierre, you shall have them. We are both of one mind. We know that
learning Latin is not the most amusing occupation in the world, but
still it must be learned."

"Why," said Charles modestly, "you don't understand Latin, aunt, do
you?"

"No," said Mrs. Howard, "but I am a woman, and it is not thought
necessary that a woman should understand Latin; nor can I explain to
you, at your age, why it is expected that a gentleman should; but here
are several gentlemen present--ask them whether it be not necessary that
a gentleman should."

Charles gathered all the opinions, and especially that of the
entertaining traveller.

Mrs. Holloway, the silly lady, during that part of the conversation from
which she might have acquired some knowledge, had retired to the further
end of the room to a game at trictrac with an obsequious chaplain. Her
game being finished, she came up to hear what the crowd round the sofa
could be talking about; and hearing Charles ask the opinions of the
gentlemen about the necessity of learning Latin, she nodded sagaciously
at Mrs. Howard, and, by way of making up for former errors, said to
Charles, in the most authoritative tone,--

"Yes, I can assure you, Mr. Charles, I am quite of the gentlemen's
opinion, and so is every body--and this is a point upon which I have
some right to speak; for my Augustus, who is only a year and seven
months older than you are, sir, is one of the best scholars of his age,
I am told, in England. But then, to be sure, it was flogged into him
well at first, at a public school, which, I understand, is the best way
of making good scholars."

"And the best way of making boys love literature?" said Mrs. Howard.

"Certainly, certainly," said Mrs. Holloway, who mistook Mrs. Howard's
tone of inquiry for a tone of assertion, a tone more familiar to
her--"certainly, ma'am, I knew you would come round to my notions at
last. I'm sure my Augustus must be fond of his Latin, for never in the
vacations did I ever catch him with any English book in his hand!"

"Poor boy!" said Charles, with unfeigned compassion, "And when, my
dear Mrs. Howard," continued Mrs. Holloway, laying her hand upon Mrs.
Howard's arm, with a yet untasted pinch of snuff between her fingers,
"when will you send Mr. Charles to school?"

"Oh, aunt, don't send me away from you--Oh, sir! Mr. Russell, try me--I
will do my very, _very_ best, without having it flogged into me, to
learn Latin--only try me."

"Dear sir, I really beg your pardon," said Mrs. Holloway to Mr. Russell;
"I absolutely only meant to support Mrs. Howard's opinion for the sweet
boy's good; and I thought I saw you go out of the room, or somebody else
went out, whilst I was at trictrac. But I'm convinced a private tutor
may do wonders at the same time; and if my Augustus prejudiced me
in favour of public education, you'll excuse a mother's partiality.
Besides, I make it a rule never to interfere in the education of my
boys. Mr. Holloway is answerable for them; and if he prefer public
schools to a private tutor, you must be sensible, sir, it would be very
wrong in me to set my poor judgment in opposition to Mr. Holloway's
opinion."

Mr. Russell bowed; for, when a lady claims a gentleman's assent to a
series of inconsistent propositions, what answer can he make but--a bow?
Mrs. Holloway's carriage was now at the door, and, without troubling
herself any further about the comparative merits of public and private
education, she departed.

When Mrs. Howard was left alone with her nephew, she seized the moment,
while his mind was yet warm, to make a lasting impression. Charles,
instead of going to Buffon's account of the elephant, which he was very
impatient to read, sat down resolutely to his Latin lesson. Mrs. Howard
looked over his shoulder, and when he saw her smile of approbation, he
said, "Then you won't send me away from you?"

"Not unless you oblige me to do so," said his aunt: "I love to have you
with me, and I will try for one year whether you have energy enough to
learn what is disagreeable to you, without--"

"Without its being flogged into me," said Charles: "you shall see."

This boy had a great deal of energy and application. The Latin lessons
were learned very perfectly; and as he did not spend above an hour a day
at them, he was not disgusted with application. His general taste for
literature, and his fund of knowledge, increased rapidly from year to
year, and the activity of his mind promised continual improvement. His
attachment to Mrs. Howard increased as he grew up, for she never claimed
any gratitude from her pupil, or exacted from him any of those little
observances, which women sometimes consider as essential proofs of
affection. She knew that these minute attentions are particularly
irksome to boys, and that they are by no means the natural expressions
of their feelings. She had sufficient strength of mind to be secure in
the possession of those qualities which merit esteem and love, and
to believe that the child whom she had educated had a heart and
understanding that must feel and appreciate her value.

When Charles Howard was about thirteen, an event happened which changed
his prospects in life. Mrs. Howard's large fortune was principally
derived from an estate in the West Indies, which had been left to her by
her grandfather. She did not particularly wish to be the proprietor of
slaves; and from the time that she came to the management of her own
affairs, she had been desirous to sell her West India property.
Her agent represented to her that this could not be done without
considerable loss. From year to year the business was delayed, till at
length a gentleman, who had a plantation adjoining to hers, offered to
purchase her estate. She was neither one of those ladies who, jealous
of their free will, would rather _act for themselves_, that is to say,
follow their own whims in matters of business, than consult men who
possess the requisite information; nor was she so ignorant of business,
or so indolent, as to be at the mercy of any designing agent or
attorney. After consulting proper persons, and after exerting a just
proportion of her own judgment, she concluded her bargain with the West
Indian. Her plantation was sold to him, and all her property was shipped
for her on board _The Lively Peggy_. Mr. Alderman Holloway, husband
to the silly Mrs. Holloway, was one of the trustees appointed by her
grandfather's will. The alderman, who was supposed to be very knowing
in all worldly concerns, sanctioned the affair with his approbation. The
lady was at this time rich; and Alderman Holloway applauded her humanity
in having stipulated for the liberty and _provision grounds_ of some old
negroes upon her plantation; he even suggested to his son Augustus, that
this would make a very pretty, proper subject for a copy of verses, to
be addressed to Mrs. Howard. The verses were written in elegant Latin;
and the young gentleman was proceeding with some difficulty in his
English translation of them, when they were suppressed by parental
authority. The alderman changed his opinion as to the propriety of the
argument of this poem: the reasons which worked upon his mind were never
distinctly expressed; they may, however, be deduced from the perusal of
the following letter:--

"TO MRS. FRANCES HOWARD.

"DEAR MADAM,

"Sorry am I to be under the disagreeable necessity of communicating
to you thus abruptly, the melancholy news of the loss of 'The Lively
Peggy,' with your valuable consignment on board, viz. sundry puncheons
of rum, and hogsheads of sugar, in which commodities (as usual) your
agent received the purchase-money of your late fine West India estate.
I must not, however reluctantly, omit to mention the casket of your
grandmother's jewels, which I now regret was sent by this opportunity.
'Tis an additional loss--some thousands, I apprehend.

"The captain of the vessel I have just seen, who was set on shore,
on the 15th ultimo, on the coast of Wales: his mate mutinied, and, in
conspiracy with the crew, have run away with the vessel.

"I have only to add, that Mrs. Holloway and my daughter Angelina
sincerely unite with me in compliments and condolence; and I shall be
happy if I can be of any service in the settlement of your affairs.

"Mrs Holloway desires me to say, she would do herself the honour of
waiting upon you to-morrow, but is setting out for Margate.

"I am, dear madam,

"Your most obedient and humble servant,

"A. T. Holloway.

"P.S. Your agent is much to blame for neglecting to insure."

Mrs. Howard, as soon as she had perused this epistle, gave it to her
nephew, who was reading in the room with her when she received it. He
showed more emotion on reading it than she had done. The coldness of
the alderman's letter seemed to strike the boy more than the loss of a
fortune--"And this is a friend!" he exclaimed with indignation.

"No, my love," said Mrs. Howard, with a calm smile, "I never thought Mr.
Holloway any thing more than a common acquaintance: I hope--I am sure I
have chosen _my friends_ better."

Charles fixed an eager, inquiring eye upon his aunt, which seemed to
say, "Did you mean to call me one of your friends?" and then he grew
very thoughtful.

"My dear Charles," said the aunt, after nearly a quarter of an hour's
silence, "may I know what you have been thinking of all this time?"

"Thinking of, ma'am!" said Charles, starting from his reverie--"of a
great many things--of all you have done for me--of--of what I could
do--I don't mean now; for I know I am a child, and can do nothing--I
don't mean _nothing_.--I shall soon be a man, and then I can be a
physician, or a lawyer, or something.--Mr. Russell told me the other
day, that if I applied myself, I might be whatever I pleased. What would
_you_ wish me to be, ma'am?--because that's what I will be--if I can."

"Then I wish you to be what you are."

"O madam," said Charles, with a look of great mortification, "but that's
nothing. Won't you make me of some use to you?--But I beg your pardon,
I know you can't think about me just now. Good night," said he, and
hurried out of the room.

The news of the loss of the Lively Peggy, with all the particulars
mentioned in Alderman Holloway's letter, appeared in the next day's
newspapers, and in the succeeding paper appeared an advertisement of
Mrs. Howard's house in Portman-square, of her plate, china, furniture,
books, &c.--She had never in affluence disdained economy. She had no
debts; not a single tradesman was a sufferer by her loss. She had always
lived within her annual income; and though her generous disposition had
prevented her from hoarding money, she had a small sum in the funds,
which she had prudently reserved for any unforeseen exigence. She had
also a few diamonds, which had been her mother's, which Mr. Carat, the
jeweller, who had new set them, was very willing to purchase. He waited
upon Mrs. Howard, in Portman-square, to complete the bargain.

The want of sensibility which Charles showed when his aunt was parting
with her jewels to Mr. Carat, would have infallibly ruined him in the
opinion of most ladies. He took the trinkets up, one by one, without
ceremony, and examined them, asking his aunt and the jeweller questions
about the use and value of diamonds--about the working of the mines of
Golconda--about the shining of diamonds in the dark, observed by the
children of Cogi Hassan, the rope-maker, in the Arabian Tales--about the
experiment of Francis the First upon _melting_ of diamonds and rubies.
Mr. Carat was a Jew, and, though extremely cunning, profoundly ignorant.

"Dat king wash very grand fool, beg his majesty's pardon," said the Jew,
with a shrewd smile; "but kings know better nowadays. Heaven bless dere
majesties."

Charles had a great mind to vindicate the philosophic fame of Francis
the First, but a new idea suddenly started into his head.

"My dearest aunt," cried he, stopping her hand as she was giving her
diamond ear-rings to Mr. Carat--"stay, my dearest aunt, one instant,
till I have seen whether this is a good day for selling diamonds."

"O my dear young gentleman, no day in de Jewish calendar more proper for
de purchase," said the Jew.

"For the purchase! yes," said Charles; "but for the sale?"

"My love," said his aunt, "surely you are not so foolish as to think
there are lucky and unlucky days."

"No, I don't mean any thing about lucky and unlucky days," said Charles,
running up to consult the barometer; "but what I mean is not foolish
indeed: in some book I've read that the dealers in diamonds buy them
when the air is light, and sell them when it is heavy, if they can;
because their scales are so nice that they vary with the change in the
atmosphere. Perhaps I may not remember exactly the words, but that's the
sense, I know. I'll look for the words; I know whereabout to find them."
He jumped upon a chair, to get down the book.

"But, Master Charles," said the Jew, with a show of deference, "I will
not pretend to make a bargain with you--I see you know a great deal more
than I of these traffics."

To this flattery Charles made no answer, but continued looking for the
passage he wanted in his book. Whilst he was turning over the leaves,
a gentleman, a friend of Mrs. Howard, who had promised her to meet Mr.
Carat, came in. He was the gentleman formerly mentioned by the name of
_the traveller_: he was a good judge of diamonds, and, what is better,
he was a good judge of the human heart and understanding. He was much
pleased with Charles's ready recollection of the little knowledge he
possessed, with his eagerness to make that knowledge of use to his aunt,
and more with his perfect simplicity and integrity; for Charles, after a
moment's thought, turned to the Jew and said,--

"But the day that is good for my aunt must be bad for you. The buyers
and sellers should each have fair play. Mr. Carat, your weights should
be diamonds, and then the changes in the weight of the air would not
signify one way or the other.{3}"

{Footnote 3: This observation was literally made by a boy of ten years
of age.}

Mr. Carat smiled at this speech, but, suppressing his contempt for the
young gentleman, only observed, that he should most certainly follow Mr.
Charles's advice, whenever he _wash_ rich enough to have diamonds for
weights.

The traveller drew from his pocket a small book, took a pen, and wrote
in the title-page of it, _For one who will make a good use of it_; and,
with Mrs. Howard's permission, he gave the book to her nephew.

"I do not believe," said the gentleman, "that there is at present
another copy in England: I have just got this from France by a private
hand."

The sale of his aunt's books appeared to Charles a much more serious
affair than the parting with her diamonds. He understood something of
the value of books, and he took a sorrowful leave of many which he
had read, and of many more which he had intended to read. Mrs. Howard
selected a few for her own use, and she allowed her nephew to select as
many for himself as she had done. He observed that there was a beautiful
edition of Shakspeare, which he knew his aunt liked particularly,
but which she did not keep, reserving instead of it Smith's Wealth of
Nations, which would in a few years, she said, be very useful to him.
He immediately offered his favourite Etudes de la Nature to redeem the
Shakspeare; but Mrs. Howard would not accept of it, because she justly
observed, that she could read Shakspeare _almost_ as well without its
being in such a beautiful binding. Her readiness to part with all
the luxuries to which she had been for many years accustomed, and the
freedom and openness with which she spoke of all her affairs to her
nephew, made a great impression upon his mind.

Those are mistaken who think that young people cannot be interested in
such things: if no mystery be made of the technical parts of business,
young people easily learn them, and they early take an interest in the
affairs of their parents, instead of learning to separate their own
views from those of their friends. Charles, young as he was, at this
time, was employed by his aunt frequently to copy, and sometimes to
write, letters of business for her. He drew out a careful inventory of
all the furniture before it was disposed of; he took lists of all
the books and papers: and at this work, however tiresome, he was
indefatigable, because he was encouraged by the hope of being useful.
This ambition had been early excited in his mind.

When Mrs. Howard had settled her affairs, she took a small neat house
near Westminster school{4}, for the purpose of a boarding-house for some
of the Westminster boys. This plan she preferred, because it secured an
independent means of support, and at the same time enabled her, in some
measure, to assist in her nephew's education, and to enjoy his company.
She was no longer able to afford a sufficient salary to a well-informed
private tutor; therefore she determined to send Charles to Westminster
school; and, as he would board with her, she hoped to unite by this
scheme, as much as possible, the advantages of a private and of a public
education. Mr. Russell desired still to have the care of Mrs. Howard's
nephew; he determined to offer himself as a tutor at Westminster school;
and, as his acquirements were well known to the literary world, he was
received with eagerness.

{Footnote 4: See the account of Mrs. C. Ponten, in Gibbon's Life.}

"My dear boy," said Mrs. Howard to her nephew, when he first went to
Westminster, "I shall not trouble you with a long chapter of advice: do
you remember that answer of the oracle, which seemed to strike you so
much the other day, when you were reading the life of Cicero?"

"Yes," said Charles, "I recollect it--I shall never forget it. When
Cicero asked how he should arrive at the height of glory, the oracle
answered, 'By making his own genius, and not the opinion of the people,
the guide of his life.'"

"Well," said Mrs. Howard, smiling, "if I were your oracle, and you were
to put the same question to me, I think I should make you nearly the
same answer; except that I should change the word genius into good
sense; and, instead of _the people_, I should say _the world_, which,
in general, I think, means all the _silly people_ of one's acquaintance.
Farewell: now go to the Westminster world."

Westminster was quite a new world to young Howard. The bustle and noise
at first astonished his senses, and almost confounded his understanding;
but he soon grew accustomed to the din, and familiarized to the sight
of numbers. At first, he thought himself much inferior to all his
companions, because practice had given them the power of doing many
things with ease, which to him appeared difficult, merely because he had
not been used to them. In all their games and plays, either of address
or force, he found himself foiled. In a readiness of repartee, and
a certain ease and volubility of conversation, he perceived his
deficiency; and though he frequently was conscious that his ideas were
more just, and his arguments better, than those of his companions, yet
he could not at first bring out his ideas to advantage, or manage his
arguments so as to stand his ground against the mixed raillery and
sophistry of his school fellows. He had not yet the tone of his new
society, and he was as much at a loss as a traveller in a foreign
country, before he understands the language of a people who are
vociferating round about him. As fast, however, as he learned to
translate the language of his companions into his own, he discovered
that there was not so much meaning in their expressions as he had been
inclined to imagine whilst they had remained unintelligible: but he was
good-humoured and good-natured, so that, upon the whole, he was much
liked; and even his inferiority, in many little trials of skill, was,
perhaps, in his favour. He laughed with those that laughed at him, let
them triumph in his awkwardness, but still persisted in new trials, till
at last, to the great surprise of the spectators, he succeeded.

The art of boxing cost him more than all the rest; but as he was neither
deficient in courage of mind nor activity of body, he did not despair
of acquiring the _necessary_ skill in this noble science--necessary, we
say, for Charles had not been a week at Westminster before he was made
sensible of the necessity of practising this art in his own defence. He
had yet a stronger motive; he found it necessary for the defence of one
who looked up to him for protection.

There was at this time at Westminster, a little boy of the name of
Oliver, a Creole, lively, intelligent, open-hearted, and affectionate
in the extreme, but rather passionate in his temper, and adverse to
application. His _literary_ education had been strangely neglected
before he came to school, so that his ignorance of the common
rudiments of spelling, reading, grammar, and arithmetic, made him the
laughing-stock of the school. The poor boy felt inexpressible shame and
anguish; his cheek burned with blushes, when every day, in the public
class, he was ridiculed and disgraced; but his dark complexion, perhaps,
prevented those blushes from being noticed by his companions, otherwise
they certainly would have suppressed, or would have endeavoured to
repress, some of their insulting peals of laughter. He suffered no
complaint or tear to escape him in public; but his book was sometimes
blistered with the tears that fell when nobody saw them: what was worse
than all the rest he found insurmountable difficulties, at every step,
in his grammar. He was unwilling to apply to any of his more learned
companions for explanations or assistance. He began to sink into despair
of his own abilities, and to imagine that he must for ever remain, what
indeed he was every day called, a dunce. He was usually flogged three
times a week. Day after day brought no relief, either to his bodily or
mental sufferings: at length his honest pride yielded, and he applied
to one of the elder scholars for help. The boy to whom he applied was
Augustus Holloway, Alderman Holloway's son, who was acknowledged to be
one of the best Latin scholars at Westminster. He readily helped Oliver
in his exercises, but he made him pay most severely for this assistance,
by the most tyrannical usage; and, in all his tyranny, he thought
himself fully justifiable, because little Oliver, beside his other
misfortunes, had the misfortune to be a fag.

There may be--though many schoolboys will, perhaps, think it scarcely
possible--there may be, in the compass of the civilised world, some
persons so barbarously ignorant as not to know what is meant by the
term fag. To these it may be necessary to explain, that at some English
schools it is the custom, that all little boys, when they first go to
school, should be under the dominion of the elder boys. These little
boys are called fags, and are forced to wait upon and obey their
master-companions. Their duties vary in different schools. I have heard
of its being customary in some places, to make use of a fag regularly in
the depth of winter instead of a warming-pan, and to send the shivering
urchin through ten or twenty beds successively to take off the chill of
cold for their luxurious masters. They are expected, in most schools, to
run of all the elder boys' errands, to be ready at their call, and to
do all their high behests. They must never complain of being tired,
or their complaints will, at least, never be regarded, because, as the
etymology of the word implies, it is their business to be tired. The
substantive _fag_ is not to be found in Dr. Johnson's Dictionary; but
the verb to fag is there a verb neuter, from fatigo, Latin, and is there
explained to mean, "to grow weary, to faint with weariness." This is all
the satisfaction we can, after the most diligent research, afford the
curious and learned reader upon the subject of _fags_ in general.

In particular, Mr. Augustus Holloway took great delight in teasing his
fag, little Oliver. One day it happened that young Howard and Holloway
were playing at nine-pins together, and little Oliver was within a
few yards of them, sitting under a tree, with a book upon his knees,
anxiously trying to make out his lesson. Holloway, whenever the
nine-pins were thrown down, called to Oliver, and made him come from his
book and set them up again: this he repeatedly did, in spite of Howard's
remonstrances, who always offered to set up the nine-pins, and who said
it teased the poor little fellow to call him every minute from what he
was about.

"Yes," said Holloway, "I know it teases him--that I see plain enough,
by his running so fast back to his _form_, like a hare--there he is,
_squatting_ again: halloo! halloo! come, start again here," cried
Holloway; "you have not done yet: bring me the bowl, halloo!"

Howard did not at all enjoy the diversion of hunting the poor boy about
in this manner, and he said, with some indignation,

"How is it possible, Holloway, that the boy can get his lesson, if you
interrupt him every instant?"

"Pooh! what signifies his foolish lesson?"

"It signifies a great deal to him," replied Howard: "you know what he
suffered this morning because he had not learned it."

"Suffered! why, what did he suffer?" said Holloway, upon whose memory
the sufferings of others made no very deep impression. "Oh, ay,
true--you mean he was flogged: more shame for him!--why did not he mind
and get his lesson better?"

"I had not time to understand it rightly," said Oliver, with a deep
sigh; "and I don't think I shall have time to-day either."

"More shame for you," repeated Holloway: "I'll lay any bet on earth, I
get all you have to get in three minutes."

"Ah, you, to be sure," said Oliver, in a tone of great humiliation; "but
then you know what a difference there is between you and me."

Holloway misunderstood him; and, thinking he meant to allude to the
difference in their age, instead of the difference of their abilities,
answered sharply,

"When I was your age, do you think I was such a dunce as you are, pray?"

"No, that I am sure you never were," said Oliver; "but perhaps you had
some good father or mother, or somebody, who taught you a little before
you came to school."

"I don't remember any thing about that," replied Holloway; "I don't know
who was so good as to teach me, but I know I was so good as to learn
fast enough, which is a goodness, I've a notion, some folks will never
have to boast of--so trot, and fetch the bowl for me, do you hear, and
set up the nine-pins. You've sense enough to do that, have not you? and
as for your lesson, I'll drive that into your head by and by, if I can,"
added he, rapping with his knuckles upon the little boy's head.

"As to my lesson," said the boy, putting aside his head from the
insulting knuckles, "I had rather try and make it out by myself, if I
can."

"If you can!" repeated Holloway, sneering; "but we all know you can't."

"Why can't he, Holloway?" exclaimed Howard, with a raised voice, for he
was no longer master of his indignation.

"Why can't he?" repeated Holloway, looking round upon Howard, with
a mixture of surprise and insolence. "You must answer that question
yourself, Howard: I say he can't."

"And I say he can, and he shall," replied Howard; "and he _shall_ have
time to learn: he's willing, and, I'll answer for it, able to learn;
and he shall not be called a dunce; and he shall have time; and he shall
have justice."

"Shall! shall! shall!" retorted Holloway, vociferating with a passion of
a different sort from Howard's. "Pray, sir, who allowed you to say
shall to me? and how dare you to talk in this _here_ style to me about
justice?--and what business have you, I should be glad to know, to
interfere between me and my fag? What right have you to him, or his
time either? And if I choose to call him a dunce forty times a day, what
then? he is a dunce, and he will be a dunce to the end of his days, I
say, and who is there thinks proper to contradict me?"

"I," said Howard, firmly; "and I'll do more than contradict you--I'll
prove that you are mistaken. Oliver, bring your book to me."

"Oliver, stir at your peril!" cried Holloway, clinching his fist with
a menacing gesture: "nobody shall give any help to my fag but myself,
sir," added he to Howard.

"I am not going to help him, I am only going to prove to him that he may
do it without your help," said Howard.

The little boy sprang forward, at these words, for his book; but his
tormentor caught hold of him, and pulling him back, said, "He's my fag!
do you recollect, sir, he's my fag?"

"Fag or no fag," cried Howard, "you shall not make a slave of him."

"I will! I shall! I will!" cried Holloway, worked up to the height
of tyrannical fury: "I will make a slave of him, if I choose it--a
negro-slave, if I please!"

At the sound of negro-slave, the little Creole burst into tears. Howard
sprang forward to free him from his tyrant's grasp: Holloway struck
Howard a furious blow, which made him stagger backwards.

"Ay," said Holloway, "learn to stand your ground, and fight, before you
meddle with me, I advise you."

Holloway was an experienced pugilist, and he knew that Howard was not;
but before his defiance had escaped his lips, he felt his blow returned,
and a battle ensued. Howard fought with all his _soul_; but the _body_
has something to do, as well as the soul, in the art of boxing, and his
body was not yet a match for his adversary's. After receiving more blows
than Holloway, perhaps, could have borne, Howard was brought to the
ground.

"Beg my pardon, and promise never to interfere between me and my fag any
more," said Holloway, standing over him triumphant: "ask my pardon."

"Never," said the fallen hero: "I'll fight you again, in the same cause,
whenever you please; I can't have a better;" and he struggled to rise.

Several boys had, by this time, gathered round the combatants, and
many admired the fortitude and spirit of the vanquished, though it
is extremely difficult to boys, if not to men, to sympathize with the
beaten. Every body called out that Howard had had enough for that night;
and though he was willing to have renewed the battle, his adversary was
withheld by the omnipotence of public opinion. As to the cause of the
combat, some few inquired into its merits, but many more were content
with seeing the fray, and with hearing, vaguely, that it began about
Howard's having interfered with Holloway's fag in an impertinent manner.

Howard's face was so much disfigured, and his clothes were so much
stained with blood, that he did not wish to present himself such a
deplorable spectacle before his aunt; besides, no man likes to be seen,
especially by a woman, immediately after he has been beaten; therefore,
he went directly to bed as soon as he got home, but desired that one
of his companions, who boarded at Mrs. Howard's, would, if his aunt
inquired for him at supper, tell her "that he had been beaten in a
boxing match, but hoped to be more expert after another lesson or two."
This lady did not show her tenderness to her nephew by wailing over his
disaster: on the contrary, she was pleased to hear that he had fought in
so good a cause.

The next morning, as soon as Howard went to school, he saw little Oliver
watching eagerly for him.

"Mr. Howard--Charles," said he, catching hold of him, "I've one word to
say: let him call me dunce, or slave, or negro, or what he will,
don't you mind any more about me--I can't bear to see it," said the
affectionate child: "I'd rather have the blows myself, only I know I
could not bear them as you did."

Oliver turned aside his head, and Howard, in a playful voice, said,
"Why, my little Oliver, I did not think you were such a coward: you must
not make a coward of me."

No sooner did the boys go out to play in the evening, than Howard called
to Oliver, in Holloway's hearing, and said, "If you want any assistance
from me, remember, I'm ready."

"You may be ready, but you are not able," cried Holloway, "to give him
any assistance--therefore, you'd better be quiet: remember last night."

"I do remember it perfectly," said Howard, calmly.

"And do you want any more?--Come, then, I'll tell you what, I'll box
with you every day, if you please, and when you have conquered me, you
shall have my fag all to yourself, if you please; but, till then, you
shall have nothing to do with him."

"I take you at your word," said Howard, and a second battle began. As
we do not delight in fields of battle, or hope to excel, like Homer, in
describing variety of wounds, we shall content ourselves with relating,
that after five pitched battles, in which Oliver's champion received
bruises of all shapes and sizes, and of every shade of black, blue,
green, and yellow, his unconquered spirit still maintained the justice
of his cause, and with as firm a voice as at first he challenged his
constantly victorious antagonist to a sixth combat.

"I thought you had learned by this time," said the successful pugilist,
"that Augustus Holloway is not to be conquered by one of _woman breed_."
To this taunt Howard made no reply; but whether it urged him to superior
exertion, or whether the dear-bought experience of the five preceding
days had taught him all the caution that experience only can teach, we
cannot determine; but, to the surprise of all the spectators, and to
the lively joy of Oliver, the redoubted Holloway was brought, after an
obstinate struggle, fairly to the ground. Every body sympathized with
the generous victor, who immediately assisted his fallen adversary
to rise, and offered his hand in token of reconciliation. Augustus
Holloway, stunned by his fall, and more by his defeat, returned from
the field of battle as fast as the crowd would let him, who stopped
him continually with their impertinent astonishment and curiosity; for
though the boasted unconquerable hero had pretty evidently received a
black eye, not one person would believe it without looking close in his
face; and many would not trust the information of their own senses,
but pressed to hear the news confirmed by the reluctant lips of the
unfortunate Augustus. In the meantime, little Oliver, a fag no longer,
exulting in his liberty, clapped his joyful hands, sang, and capered
round his deliverer.--"And now," said he, fixing his grateful,
affectionate eyes upon Howard, "you will suffer no more for me; and if
you'll let me, I'll be your fag. Do, will you? pray let me! I'll run of
your errands before you can say one, two, three, and away: only whistle
for me," said he, whistling, "and I'll hear you, wherever I am. If you
only hold up your finger when you want me, I'm sure I shall see it;
and I'll always set up your nine-pins, and fly for your ball, let me be
doing what I will. May I be your fag?"

"Be my _friend_!" said Howard, taking Oliver in his arms, with emotion
which prevented him from articulating any other words. The word friend
went to the little Creole's heart, and he clung to Howard in silence.
To complete his happiness, little Oliver this day obtained permission
to board at Mrs. Howard's, so that he was now constantly to be with his
protector. Howard's friendship was not merely the sudden enthusiasm of
a moment; it was the steady persevering choice of a manly mind, not the
caprice of a school-boy. Regularly, every evening, Oliver brought his
books to his friend, who never was too busy to attend to him. Oliver was
delighted to find that he understood Howard's manner of explaining: his
own opinion of himself rose with the opinion which he saw his instructor
had of his abilities. He was convinced that he was not doomed to be a
dunce for life; his ambition was rekindled; his industry was encouraged
by hope, and rewarded by success. He no longer expected daily
punishment, and that worst of all punishments, disgrace. His heart was
light, his spirits rose, his countenance brightened with intelligence,
and resumed its natural vivacity: to his masters and his companions
he appeared a new creature. "What has inspired you?" said one of his
masters to him one day, surprised at the rapid development of his
understanding--"what has inspired you?"

"My good genius," said the little boy, pointing to Howard. Howard had
some merit in giving up a good deal of his time to Oliver, because he
knew the value of time, and he had not quite so much as he wished
for himself. The day was always too short for him; every moment was
employed; his active mind went from one thing to another as if it did
not know the possibility of idleness, and as if he had no idea of any
recreation but in a change of employment. Not that he was always poring
over books, but his mind was active, let him be about what he would;
and, as his exertions were always voluntary, there was not that
opposition in his opinion between the ideas of play and work, which
exists so strongly in the imaginations of those school-boys who
are driven to their tasks by fear, and who escape from them to that
delicious exercise of their free-will which they call play.

     "Constraint, that sweetens liberty,"

often gives a false value to its charms, or rather a false idea to its
nature. Idleness, ennui, noise, mischief, riot, and a nameless train of
mistaken notions of pleasure, are often classed, in a young man's mind,
under the general head of _liberty_.

Mr. Augustus Holloway, who is necessarily recalled to our notice, when
we want to personify an ill-educated young man, was, in the strictest
sense of the word, a school-boy--a clever school-boy--a good scholar--a
good historian: he wrote a good hand--read with fluency--declaimed at a
public exhibition of Westminster orators with no bad grace and emphasis,
and had always extempore words, if not extempore sense, at command. But
still he was but a school-boy. His father thought him a man, and more
than a man. Alderman Holloway prophesied to his friends that his son
Augustus would be one of the first orators in England. He was in a hurry
to have him ready to enter college, and had a borough secure for him at
the proper age. The proper age, he regretted, that parliament had fixed
to twenty-one; for the alderman was impatient to introduce his young
statesman to the house, especially as he saw honours, perhaps a title,
in the distant perspective of his son's advancement.

Whilst this vision occupied the father's imagination, a vision of
another sort played upon the juvenile fancy of his son--a vision of
a gig; for, though Augustus was but a school-boy, he had very manly
ideas--if those ideas be manly which most young men have. Lord Rawson,
the son of the Earl of Marryborough, had lately appeared to Augustus in
a gig. The young Lord Rawson had lately been a school-boy at Westminster
like Augustus: he was now master of himself and three horses at College.
Alderman Holloway had lent the Earl of Marryborough certain monies, the
interest of which the earl scrupulously paid in civility. The alderman
valued himself upon being a shrewd man; he looked to one of the earl's
boroughs as a security for his principal, and, from long-sighted
political motives, encouraged an intimacy between the young nobleman and
his son. It was one of those useful friendships, one of those fortunate
connexions, which some parents consider as the peculiar advantage of a
public school. Lord Rawson's example already powerfully operated upon
his young friend's mind, and this intimacy was most likely to have a
decisive influence upon the future destiny of Augustus. Augustus was the
son of an alderman. Lord Rawson was two years older than Holloway--had
left school--had been at college--had driven both a curricle and a
barouche, and had gone through all the gradations of coachmanship--was a
man, and had _seen the world_. How many things to excite the ambition
of a schoolboy! Augustus was impatient for the moment when he might
"be what he admired." The drudgery of Westminster, the confinement,
the ignominious appellation of _a boy_, were all insupportable to this
_young man_. He had obtained from his father a promise, that he should
leave school in a few months; but these months appeared to him an age.
It was rather a misfortune to Holloway that he was so far advanced in
his Latin and Greek studies, for he had the less to do at school; his
school business quickly despatched, his time hung upon his hands. He
never thought of literature as an amusement for his leisure hours;
he had no idea of improving himself further in general science and
knowledge. He was told that his education was _nearly_ at an end; he
believed it was _quite_ finished, and he was glad of it, and glad it
was so well over. In the idle time that hung upon his hands, during this
intermediate state at Westminster, he heartily regretted that he
could not commence his manly career by learning to _drive_--to drive
a curricle. Lord Rawson had carried him down to the country, the last
summer vacation, in his _dog-cart_, driven _randem-tandem_. The reins
had touched his fingers. The whip had been committed to his hand, and
he longed for a repetition of these pleasures. From the windows of the
house in Westminster, where he boarded, Holloway at every idle moment
lolled, to enjoy a view of every carriage, and of every coachman that
passed.

Mr. Supine, Mr. Holloway's tutor, used, at these leisure moments, to
employ himself with practising upon the German flute, and was not sorry
to be relieved from his pupil's conversation. Sometimes it was provoking
to the amateur in music to be interrupted by the exclamations of his
pupil; but he kept his eyes steadily upon his music-book, and contented
himself with recommending a difficult passage, when Mr. Holloway's
raptures about horses, and coachmanship, and driving well in hand,
offended his musical ear. Mr. Supine was, both from nature and fashion,
indolent; the trouble of reproving or of guiding his pupil was too
much for him; besides, he was sensible that the task of watching,
contradicting, and thwarting a young gentleman, at Mr. Holloway's time
of life, would have been productive of the most disagreeable scenes
of altercation, and could possibly have no effect upon the gentleman's
character, which he presumed was perfectly well formed at this time. Mr.
and Mrs. Holloway were well satisfied with his improvements. Mr. Supine
was on the best terms imaginable with the whole family, and thought it
his business to keep himself _well_ with his pupil; especially as he had
some secret hope that, through Mr. Holloway's interest with Lord Rawson,
and through Lord Rawson's influence with a young nobleman, who was just
going abroad, he might be invited as a travelling companion in a tour
upon the continent. His taste for music and painting had almost raised
him to the rank of a connoisseur: an amateur he modestly professed
himself, and he was frequently stretched, in elegant ease, upon a sofa,
already in reverie in Italy, whilst his pupil was conversing out of the
window, in no very elegant dialect, with the driver of a stagecoach
in the neighbourhood. Young Holloway was almost as familiar with this
coachman as with his father's groom, who, during his visits at home,
supplied the place of Mr. Supine, in advancing his education. The
stage-coachman so effectually wrought upon the ambition of Augustus,
that his desire to learn _to drive_ became uncontrollable. The coachman,
partly by entreaties, and partly by the mute eloquence of a crown, was
prevailed upon to promise, that, if Holloway could manage it without his
tutor's knowledge, he should ascend to the honours of the box, and at
least have the satisfaction of _seeing some good driving_.

Mr. Supine was soon invited to a private concert, at which Mrs. Holloway
was expected, and at which her daughter, Miss Angelina Holloway, was
engaged to perform. Mr. Supine's judicious applause of this young lady's
execution was one of his greatest recommendations to the whole family,
at least to the female part of it; he could not, therefore, decline an
invitation to this concert. Holloway complained of a sore throat, and
desired to be excused from accompanying his tutor, adding, with his
usual politeness, that "music was the greatest bore in nature, and
especially Angelina's music." For the night of the concert Holloway had
arranged his plan with the stage-coachman. Mr. Supine dressed, and
then practised upon the German flute, till towards nine o'clock in the
evening. Holloway heard the stage-coach rattling through the street,
whilst his tutor was yet in the middle of a long concerto: the coachman
was to stop at the public-house, about ten doors off, to take up parcels
and passengers, and there he was to wait for Holloway; but he had given
him notice that he could not wait many minutes.

"You may practise the rest without book, in the chair, as you are going
to ---- street, _quite at your ease_, Mr. Supine," said Holloway to his
tutor.

"Faith, so I can, and I'll adopt your idea, for it's quite a novel
thing, and may take, if the fellows will only carry one steady. Good
night: I'll mention your sore throat _properly_ to Mrs. Holloway."

No sooner were the tutor and his German flute safely raised upon the
chairmen's shoulders, than his pupil recovered from his sore throat,
ran down to the place where the stage was waiting, seized the
stage-coachman's down-stretched hand, sprang up, and seated himself
triumphantly upon the coach-box.

"Never saw a cleverer fellow," said the coachman: "now we are off."

"Give me the reins, then," said Holloway.

"Not till we are out o'town," said the coachman: "when we get off the
stones, we'll see a little of your driving."

When they got on the turnpike road, Holloway impatiently seized the
reins, and was as much gratified by this coachman's praises of his
driving as ever he had been by the applauses he had received for his
Latin verses. A taste for vulgar praise is the most dangerous taste a
young man can have; it not only leads him into vulgar company, but
it puts him entirely in the power of his companions, whoever they may
happen to be. Augustus Holloway, seated beside a coachman, became, to
all intents and purposes, a coachman himself; he caught, and gloried in
catching, all his companion's slang, and with his language caught all
his ideas. The coachman talked with rapture of some young gentleman's
horses which he had lately seen; and said that, if he was a gentleman,
there was nothing he should pride himself so much upon as his horses.
Holloway, as he was a gentleman, determined to have the finest horses
that could be had for money, as soon as he should become his own master.

"And then," continued the coachman, "if I was a gentleman born, I'd
never be shabby in the matters of wages and perquisites to them that
be to look after my horses, seeing that horses can't be properly looked
after for nothing."

"Certainly not," agreed the young gentleman:--"my friend, lord Rawson, I
know, has a prodigious smart groom, and so will I, all in good time."

"To be sure," said the coachman; "but it was not in regard to grooms I
was meaning, so much as in regard to a coachman, which, I take it, is
one of the first persons to be considered in a really grand family,
seeing how great a trust is placed in him--(mind, sir, if you please,
the turn at the corner, it's rather sharp)--seeing how great a trust is
placed in him, as I was observing, a good coachman is worth his weight
in gold."

Holloway had not leisure to weigh the solidity of this observation, for
the conversation was now interrupted by the sound of a postchaise, which
drove rapidly by.

"The job and four!" exclaimed the coachman, with as many oaths "as the
occasion required."

"Why did you let it pass us?" And with enthusiasm which forgot all
ceremony, he snatched the whip from his young companion, and, seizing
the reins, drove at a furious rate. One of the chaise postilions luckily
dropped his whip. They passed the job and four; and the coachman, having
redeemed his honour, resigned once more the reins to Holloway, upon his
promising not to let the job and four get a head of them. The postilions
were not without ambition: the men called to each other, and to their
horses; the horses caught some portion of their masters' spirit, and
began to gain upon the coach. The passengers in the coach put out their
heads, and female voices screamed in vain. All these terrors increased
the sport; till at length, at a narrow part of the road, the rival
coachman and postilions hazarded every thing for precedency. Holloway
was desperate in proportion to his ignorance. The coachman attempted
to snatch the reins, but, missing his grasp, he shortened those of the
off-hand horse, and drew them the wrong way: the coach ran upon a bank,
and was overturned. Holloway was dismayed and silent; the coachman
poured forth a torrent of abuse, sparing neither friend nor foe; the
complaints of the female passengers were so incoherent, and their fears
operated so much upon their imagination, that in the first moments of
confusion, each asserted that she had broken either an arm or a leg, or
fractured her skull.

The moon, which had shone bright in the beginning of the evening, was
now under a cloud, and the darkness increased the impatience of
the various complainers; at length a lantern was brought from the
turnpike-house, which was near the spot where the accident happened. As
soon as the light came, the ladies looked at each other, and after they
had satisfied themselves that no material injury had been done to their
clothes, and that their faces were in no way disfigured, they began to
recover from their terrors, and were brought to allow that all their
limbs were in good preservation, and that they had been too hasty in
declaring that their skulls were fractured. Holloway laughed loudly at
all this, and joined in all the wit of the coachman upon the occasion.
The coach was lifted up; the passengers got in; the coachman and
Holloway mounted the box, when, just as they were setting off, the
coachman heard a voice crying to him to stop. He listened, and the
voice, which seemed to be that of a person in great pain, again called
for assistance.

"It's the mulatto woman," said the coachman: "we forgot her in the
bustle. Lend me hold of the lantern, and stand at the horses' heads,
whilst I see after her," added the coachman, addressing himself to the
man who had come from the turnpike-house.

"I shan't stir for a _mulatto_, I promise you," said Holloway, brutally:
"she was on the top of the coach, wasn't she? She must have had a fine
hoist!"

The poor woman was found to be much hurt: she had been thrown from the
top of the coach into a ditch, which had stones at the bottom of it. She
had not been able to make herself heard by any body, whilst the ladies'
loud complaints continued; nor had she been able long to call for any
assistance, for she had been stunned by her fall, and had not recovered
her senses for many minutes. She was not able to stand; but when the
coachman held her up, she put her hand to her head, and, in broken
English, said she felt too ill to travel farther that night.

"You shall have an inside place, if you'll pluck up your heart; and
you'll find yourself better with the motion of the coach."

"What, is she hurt--the mulatto woman?--I say, coachy, make haste,"
cried Holloway; "I want to be off."

"So do I," said the coachman; "but we are not likely to be off yet:
here's this here poor woman can't stand, and is all over bruises, and
won't get into the inside of the coach, though I offered her a place."

Holloway, who imagined that the sufferings of all who were not so rich
as himself could be _bought off_ for money, pulled out a handful of
silver, and leaning from the coach-box, held it towards the fainting
woman:--"Here's a shilling for every bruise at least, my good
woman:"--but the woman did not hear him, for she was very faint. The
coachman was forced to carry her to the turnpike-house, where he left
her, telling the people of the house that a return chaise would call for
her in an hour's time, and would carry her either to the next stage, or
back to town, whichever she pleased. Holloway's diversion for the rest
of the night was spoiled, not because he had too much sympathy with the
poor woman that was hurt, but because he had been delayed so long by the
accident, that he lost the pleasure of driving into the town of ----. He
had intended to have gone the whole stage, and to have returned in the
job and four. This scheme had been arranged before he set out by his
friend the coachman; but the postilions in the job and four having won
the race, and made the best of their way, had now returned, and met the
coach about two miles from the turnpike-house. "So," said Holloway,
"I must descend, and get home before Mr. Supine wakens from his first
sleep."

Holloway called at the turnpike-house, to inquire after the mulatto;
or, rather, one of the postilions stopped as he had been desired by the
coachman, to take her up to town, if she was able to go that night.

The postilion, after he had spoken to the woman, came to the
chaise-door, and told Holloway "that he could hardly understand what she
said, she talked such outlandish English; and that he could not make out
where she wanted to be carried to."

"Ask the name of some of her friends in town," cried Holloway, "and
don't let her keep us here all night."

"She has no friends, as I can find," replied the postilion, "nor
acquaintance neither."

"Well, whom does she belong to, then?"

"She belongs to nobody--she's quite a stranger in these parts, and
doesn't know no more than a child where to go in all London; she only
knows the Christian name of an old gardener, where she lodged, she
says."

"What would she have us to do with her, then?" said Holloway. "Drive on,
for I shall be late."

The postilion, more humane than Holloway, exclaimed, "No, master,
no!--it's a sin to leave her upon the road this ways, though she's no
Christian, as we are, poor copper-coloured soul! I was once a stranger
myself in _Lon'on_, without a six-pence to bless myself; so I know what
it is, master."

The good-natured postilion returned to the mulatto woman. "Mistress,"
said he, "I'd fain see ye safe home, if you could but think of the
t'other name of that gardener that you mentioned lodging with; because
there be so many Pauls in London town, that I should never find your
Paul, as you don't know neither the name of his street--But I'll tell ye
now all the streets I'm acquainted with, and that's a many: do you stop
me, mistress, when I come to the right; for you're sadly bruised, and I
won't see ye left this ways on the road."

He then named several streets: the mulatto woman stopped him at one
name, which she recollected to be the name of the street in which the
gardener lived. The woman at the turnpike-house, as soon as she heard
the street in which he lived named, said she knew this gardener; that he
had a large garden about a mile off, and that he came from London early
almost every morning with his cart, for garden-stuff for the market: she
advised the mulatto woman to stay where she was that night, and to send
to ask the gardener to come on to the turnpike-house for her in the
morning. The postilion promised to go to the gardener's "by the first
break of day." The woman raised her head to bless him; and the impatient
Holloway loudly called to him to return to his horses, swearing that he
would not give him one farthing for himself if he did not.

The anxiety which Holloway felt to escape detection kept him in pain;
but Holloway never measured or estimated his pleasures and his
pains; therefore he never discovered that, even upon the most selfish
calculation, he had paid too dear for the pleasure of sitting upon a
coach-box for one hour.

It was two o'clock in the morning before the chaise arrived in town,
when he was set down at the house at which the stage-coach put up,
walked home, got in at his bedchamber window--his bedchamber was upon
the ground-floor. Mr. Supine was fast asleep, and his pupil triumphed
in his successful _frolic_. Whilst Holloway, in his dreams, was driving
again, and again overturning stage-coaches, young Howard, in his
less manly dreams, saw Dr. B., the head master of Westminster school,
advancing towards him, at a public examination, with a prize medal in
his hand, which turned, Howard thought, as he looked upon it, first into
the face of his aunt, smiling upon him; then into a striking likeness of
his tutor, Mr. Russell, who also smiled upon him; and then changed into
the head of little Oliver, whose eyes seemed to sparkle with joy. Just
at the instant, Howard awoke, and, opening his eyes, saw Oliver's face
close to him, laughing heartily.

"Why," exclaimed Oliver, "you seized my head with both your hands when I
came to waken you: what could you be dreaming of, Charles?"

"I dreamed I took you for a medal, and I was right glad to have hold of
you," said Howard, laughing; "but I shall not get my medal by dreaming
about it. What o'clock is it? I shall be ready in half a second."

"Ay," said Oliver, "I wont tell you what o'clock it is till you're
dressed: make haste; I have been up this half hour, and I've got every
thing ready, and I've carried the little table, and all your books, and
the pen and ink, and all the things, out to our seat; and the sun shines
upon it, and every thing looks cheerful, and you'll have a full hour to
work, for it's only half after five."

At the back of Mrs. Howard's house there was a little garden; at the end
of the garden was a sort of root-house, which Oliver had cleaned out,
and which he dignified by the title of _the seat_. There were some pots
of geraniums and myrtles kept in it, with Mrs. Howard's permission, by a
gardener, who lived next door to her, and who frequently came to work
in her garden. Oliver watered the geraniums, and picked off the dead
leaves, whilst Howard was writing at the little table which had been
prepared for him. Howard had at this time two grand works in hand, on
which he was enthusiastically intent: he was translating the little
French book which the traveller had given to him; and he was writing _an
essay for a prize_. The young gentlemen at Westminster were engaged in
writing essays for a periodical paper; and Dr. B. had promised to give
a prize medal as the reward for that essay, which he, and a jury of
critics, to be chosen from among the boys themselves, should pronounce
to be the best composition.

"I won't talk to you, I won't interrupt you," said Oliver to Howard;
"but only answer me one question: what is your essay about?"

Howard put his finger upon his lips, and shook his head.

"I assure you I did not look, though I longed to peep at it this morning
before you were up. Pray, Charles, do you think _I_ shall ever be able
to write essays?"

"To be sure," said Howard; "why not?"

"Ah," said Oliver, with a sigh, "because I've no genius, you know."

"But," said Howard, "have not you found out that you could do a great
many things that you thought you could not do?"

"Ay, thank you for that: but then you know, those are the sort of things
which can be done without genius."

"And what _are_ the things," replied Howard, "which cannot be done
without genius?"

"Oh, a great, _great_ many, I believe," said Oliver: "you know Holloway
said so."

"But we are not forced to believe it, because Holloway said so, are we?
Besides, a _great many things_ may mean any thing, buckling your shoes,
or putting on your hat, for instance."

Oliver laughed at this, and said, "These, to be sure, are not the sort
of things that can't be done without genius."

"What are the sort of things?" repeated Howard. "Let us, now I've the
pen in my hand, make a list of them."

"Take a longer bit of paper."

"No, no, the list will not be so very long as you think it will. What
shall I put first?--make haste, for I'm in a hurry."

"Well--writing, then--writing, I am sure, requires genius."

"Why?"

"Because I never could write, and I've often tried and tried to write
something, but I never could; because I've no genius for it."

"What did you try to write?" said Howard.

"Why, letters," said Oliver: "my uncle, and my aunt, and my two cousins,
desired I would write to them regularly once a fortnight; but I never
can make out a letter, and I'm always sorry when letter-writing day
comes; and if I sit thinking and thinking for ever so long I can find
nothing to say. I used always to beg _a beginning_ from somebody; but
then, when I've got over the beginning, that's only three or four lines;
and if I stretch it out ever so much, it won't make a whole letter; and
what can I put in the middle? There's nothing but that _I am well, and
hope they are all well_; or else, _that I am learning Latin, as you
desired, dear uncle, and am forward in my English_. The end I can manage
well enough, because there's duty and love to send to every body; and
about _the post is just going out, and believe me to be, in haste, your
dutiful and affectionate nephew_. But then," continued little Oliver,
"this is all nonsense, I know, and I'm ashamed to write such bad
letters. Now your pen goes on, scratch, scratch, scratch, the moment
you sit down to it; and you can write three pages of a nice, long, good
letter, whilst I am writing '_My dear uncle John_,' and that's what I
call having a genius for writing. I wonder how you came by it: could you
write good letters when you were of my age?"

"I never wrote any letters at your age," said Howard.

"Oh, how happy you must have been! But then, if you never learned, how
comes it that you can write them now? How can you always find something
to say?"

"I never write but when I have something to say; and you know, when you
had something to say last post about Easter holidays, your pen, Oliver,
went scratch, scratch, scratch, as fast as any body's."

"So it did," cried Oliver; "but then the thing is, I'm forced to write
when I've nothing about the holidays to say."

"Forced?"

"Yes, because I'm afraid my uncle and cousins should be angry if I
didn't write."

"I'm sure I'm much obliged," said Howard, "to my dear aunt, who never
forced me to write: she always said, 'Never write, Charles, but when
you like it;' and I never did. When I had any thing to say, that is,
any thing to describe, or any reasons to give upon any subject, or any
questions to ask, which I very much wished to have answered, then, you
know, I could easily write, because I had nothing to do but to write
down just the words which I should have said, if I had been speaking."

"But I thought writing was quite a different thing from speaking,
because, in writing, there must be sentences, and long sentences, and
fine sentences, such as there are in books."

"In _some_ books," said Howard; "but not in all."

"Besides," continued Oliver, "one person's speaking is quite different
from another person's speaking. Now I believe I make use of a great
number of odd words, and vulgar expressions, and bad English, which I
learned from being with the servants, I believe, at home. You have never
talked to servants, Charles, I dare say, for you have not one of their
words."

"No," said Charles, "never; and my aunt took a great deal of pains to
prevent me from hearing any of their conversation; therefore it was
impossible that I should catch--"

Here the conversation was interrupted by the appearance of old Paul, the
gardener.

"So, Paul," cried little Oliver, "I've been doing your work for you this
morning; I've watered all the geraniums, and put the Indian corn in the
sun; what kept you so late in your bed this fine morning, Paul?--fie,
Paul!"

"You would not say fie, master," replied Paul, "if you knew how early I
had been out of my bed, this morning: I was abroad afore sunrise, so I
was, master."

"And why didn't you come to work then, Paul? You shall not have the
watering-pot till you tell me: don't look so grave about it; you know
you must smile when I please, Paul."

"I can't smile, just now, master," said old Paul; but he smiled, and
then told Oliver, that "the reason he could not smile was, that he was a
little sick at heart, with just coming from the sight of a poor soul who
had been sadly bruised by a fall from the top of the stage, which was
overturned last night. She was left all night at the _pike_, and as she
had no other friends, she sent for me by a return chay-boy, and I went
for her, and brought her home in my covered cart, to my good woman,
which she liked, with good reason, better ten to one than the stage.
And she's terribly black and blue, and does not seem quite right in her
head, to my fancy."

"I wish we could do something for her," said Howard. "As soon as Mr.
Russell is up, I'll ask him to go with us to see her. We will call as we
go by to school this morning."

"But, master," said the gardener, "I should warn ye beforehand, that
mayhap you mayn't pity her so much, for she's rather past her best days;
and bad must have been her best, for she's swarthy, and not like one of
this country: she comes from over the seas, and they call her a--a--not
quite a negro."

"A mulatto!--I like her the better," cried Oliver; "for my nurse was a
mulatto. I'll go and waken Mr. Russell this instant, for I'm sure he'll
not be angry." He ran away to Mr. Russell, who was not angry at being
awakened, but dressed himself _almost_ as expeditiously as Oliver
wished, and set out immediately with his pupils, delighted to be the
companion of their benevolent schemes, instead of being the object of
their fear and hatred. Tutors may inspire affection, even though they
have the misfortune to be obliged to teach Greek and Latin.{5}

{Footnote 5: Vide Dr. Johnson's assertions to the contrary, in Mrs.
Piozzi's Anecdotes.}

When the boys arrived at the gardener's, they found the poor mulatto
woman lying upon a bed, in a small close room, which was so full of
smoke, when they came in, that they could hardly breathe: the little
window, that let in but a glimmering light, could not, without
difficulty, be opened. The poor woman made but few complaints; she
appeared to be most concerned at the thoughts of being a burden to the
good old gardener and his wife. She said that she had not been long in
England; that she came to London in hopes of finding a family who had
been very kind to her in her youth; but that, after inquiry at the house
where they formerly lived, she could hear nothing of them. After a great
deal of trouble, she discovered that a West India gentleman, who had
known her abroad, was now at Bath; but she had spent the last farthing
of her money, and she was, therefore, unable to undertake the journey.
She had brought over with her, she said, some foreign seeds of flowers,
which her young mistress used to be fond of when she was a child, which
she had kept till hunger obliged her to offer them to a gardener for a
loaf of bread. The gardener to whom she offered them was old Paul, who
took compassion upon her distress, lodged her for a week, and at last
paid for an outside place for her upon the Bath coach. There was such
an air of truth and simplicity in this woman, that Mr. Russell, more
experienced than his pupils, believed her story, at once, as implicitly
as they did. "Oh," exclaimed little Oliver, "I have but this half-crown
for her: I wish Holloway had but paid me my half-guinea; I'll ask him
for it again to-day; and will you come with us here again, this evening,
Mr. Russell, that I may bring it then?"

Mr. Russell and Howard hired the room for a fortnight in which the
mulatto woman was now lying, and paid old Paul, the gardener, for it,
promising, at the same time, to supply her with food. The gardener's
wife, at the poor woman's earnest request, promised that, as soon as she
was able to sit up, she would get her some coarse plain work to do.

"But," said Oliver, "how can she see to work in this smoke? I'm sure it
makes my eyes water so that I can hardly bear it, though I have been in
it scarcely ten minutes."

"I wish," exclaimed Howard, turning to Mr. Russell, "that this chimney
could be cured of smoking."

"Oh, well-a-day," said the gardener, "we must put up with it as it is,
for I've had doctors to it, at one time or another, that have cost me
a power of money; but, after all, it's as bad as ever, and my good dame
never lights a fire in it this fine spring weather; howsomever, she
(pointing to the mulatto woman) is so chilly, coming from a country
that, by all accounts, is a hot-house, compared with ours, that she
can't sleep o' nights, or live o' days without a small matter of fire,
which she's welcome to, though, you see, it almost fills the house with
smoke."

Howard, during the gardener's speech, had been trying to recollect where
it was that he had lately seen some essay upon smoky chimneys; and he
suddenly exclaimed, "It was in Dr. Franklin's works--was it not, Mr.
Russell?"

"What?" said Mr. Russell, smiling.

"That essay upon smoky chimneys which I said I would skip over, the
other day, because I had nothing to do with it, and I thought I should
not understand. Don't you remember telling me, sir, that I had better
not skip it, because it might, some time or other, be useful to me?
I wish I could get the book now; I would take pains to understand it,
because, perhaps, I might find out how this poor man's chimney might
be cured of smoking. As for his window, I know how that can be easily
mended, because I once watched a man who was hanging some windows for my
aunt--I'll get some sash line."

"Do you recollect what o'clock it is, my good friend?" said Mr. Russell,
holding out his watch to Howard. "We cannot wait till you are perfect
master of the theory of smoky chimneys, and the practice of hanging
windows; it is time that we should be gone." Mr. Russell spoke this with
an air of raillery, as he usually did, when he was particularly pleased.

As they were going away, Oliver earnestly repeated his request, that
Mr. Russell would come again in the evening, that he might have an
opportunity of giving the poor woman his half-guinea. Mr. Russell
promised him that he would; but he at the same time added, "All charity,
my dear Oliver, does not consist in giving money: it is easy for a man
to put his hand in his pocket, and take out a few shillings, to give any
person in distress."

"I wish," said Oliver, "I was able to do more! what can I do? I'll think
of something. Howard, will you think of something that I can do? But I
must see about my Latin lesson first, for I had not time to look it over
this morning, before I came out."

When they got back, the business of the day, for some hours, suspended
all thoughts of the mulatto woman; but, in the first interval of
leisure, Oliver went in search of Mr. Holloway, to ask for his
half-guinea. Holloway had a crowd of his companions round him, whom he
seemed to be entertaining with some very diverting story, for they were
laughing violently when little Oliver first came up to them; but they no
sooner perceived him than all their merriment suddenly ceased. Holloway
first lowered his voice into a whisper, and then observing that Oliver
still stood his ground, he asked him, in his usual peremptory tone, what
might be his business? Oliver drew him aside, and asked him to pay him
_the_ half-guinea. "_The_ half-guinea?" repeated Holloway: "man, you
talk of _the_ half-guinea as if there was but one half-guinea in the
world: you shall have _the_ half-guinea, for I hate to be dunned--Stay,
I believe I have no _half_-a-guinea about me: you can't give me two
half-guineas for a guinea, can ye?"

"Me!"

"Well, then, you must wait till I can get change."

"Must I wait? but I really want it for a particular reason, this
evening: I wish you could give it me now--you know you promised; but I
don't like putting people in mind of their promises, and I would not ask
you about the money, only that I really want it."

"Want it!--nonsense: what can you want money for, such a little chap as
you? I'll lay you any wager, your _particular_ reason, if the truth was
told, is, that you can't resist the tart-woman."

"I _can_ resist the tart-woman," cried Oliver proudly; "I have a much
better use for my money: but I don't want to boast, neither; only,
Holloway, do give me the half-guinea: shall I run and ask somebody to
give you two half-guineas for a guinea?"

"No, no, I'll not be dunned into paying you. If you had not asked me for
it, I should have given it you to-night: but since you could not trust
to my honour, you'll please to wait till to-morrow morning."

"But I did trust to your honour for a whole month."

"A month!--a great while, indeed; then trust to it a day longer; and
if you ask me for the money to-morrow, you shan't have it till the next
day. I'll teach you not to be such a little dun: nobody, that has any
spirit, can bear to be dunned, particularly for such small sums. I
thought you had been above such meanness, or, I promise you, I should
never have borrowed your half-guinea," added Holloway; and he left his
unfortunate creditor to reflect upon the new ideas of _meanness_ and
_spirit_, which had been thus artfully thrown out.

Oliver was roused from his reflections by his friend Howard. "Mr.
Russell is ready to go with us to the gardener's again," said Howard:
"have you a mind to come?"

"A great mind; but I am ashamed, for I've not got my half-guinea which
I lent." Here his newly acquired fear of meanness checked Oliver, and
without complaining of his creditor's want of punctuality, he added,
"but I should like to see the poor woman though, for all that."

They set out, but stopped in their way at a bookseller's, where Howard
inquired for that essay of Dr. Franklin on smoky chimneys, which he was
impatient to see. This bookseller was well acquainted with Mr. Russell.
Howard had promised to give the bookseller the translation of the little
French book which we formerly mentioned; and the bookseller, on his
part, was very obliging in furnishing Howard with any books he wanted.

Howard was deep in the essay on smoky chimneys, and examining the
references in the print belonging to it, whilst Mr. Russell was looking
over the prints in the Encyclopedia, with little Oliver. They were all
so intent upon what they were about, that they did not perceive the
entrance of Holloway and Mr. Supine. Mr. Supine called in merely to
see what Mr. Russell could be looking at, with so much appearance of
interest. The indolent are always curious, though they will not always
exert themselves, even to gratify their curiosity.

"Only the Encyclopaedia prints," said Supine, looking over Mr. Russell's
shoulder: "I thought you had got something new."

"Only smoky chimneys," exclaimed Holloway, looking over Howard's
shoulder: "what upon earth, Howard, can you find so entertaining in
smoky chimneys? Are you turned chimney-doctor, or chimney-sweeper? This
will be an excellent thing for Lord Rawson, won't it, Mr. Supine? We'll
tell it to him on Thursday; it will be a good joke for us, for half
the day. Pray, doctor Charles Howard," continued the wit, with mock
solemnity, "do you go up the chimneys yourself?"

Howard took this raillery with so much good-humour, that Holloway looked
quite disappointed; and Mr. Supine, in a careless tone, cried, "I take
it, reading such things as these will scarcely improve your style,
sir--will they, think ye, Mr. Russell?"

"I am not sure," replied Mr. Russell, "that Mr. Howard's _first_ object
in reading is to improve his style; but," added he, turning to the
title-page, and pointing to Franklin's name, "you, perhaps, did not
know--"

"Oh, Dr. Franklin's works," interrupted Supine: "I did not see the name
before--to be sure I must bow down to _that_."

Having thus easily satisfied Mr. Supine's critical scruples by the
authority of a name, Mr. Russell rose to depart, as he perceived that
there was no chance of getting rid of the idlers.

"What are you going to do with yourself, Russell?" said Mr. Supine;
"we'll walk with you, if you are for walking, this fine evening; only
don't let's walk like penny postmen."

"But he's in a hurry," said Oliver; "he's going to see a poor woman."

"A _poor_ woman!" said Supine; "down this close lane too!"

"Oh, let's see all that's to be seen," whispered Holloway; "ten to one
we shall get some diversion out of it: Russell's a quiz worth studying,
and Howard's his ditto."

They came to the gardener's house. Holloway's high spirits suddenly
subsided when he beheld the figure of the mulatto woman.

"What's the matter?" said Oliver, observing that he started; "why did
you start so?"

"Tell Howard I want to speak one word with him, this instant, in the
street; bid him come out to me," whispered Holloway; and he hastily
retreated before the poor woman saw his face.

"Howard," cried Holloway, "I sent for you to tell you a great secret."

"I'm sorry for it," said Charles; "for I hate secrets."

"But you can keep a secret, man, can't you?"

"If it were necessary, I hope I could; but I'd rather not hear--"

"Pooh, nonsense," interrupted Holloway, "you must hear it; I'll trust to
your honour; and, besides, I have not a moment to stand shilly shally:
I've got a promise from my father to let me go down, this Easter, with
Lord Rawson, to Marryborough, in his dog-cart, _randem-tandem_, you
know."

"I did not know it, indeed," said Charles; "but what then?"

"Why, then, you see, I must be upon my good behaviour; and you would not
do such an ill-natured trick as to betray me?"

"Betray you! I don't know what you mean," said Howard, astonished.

Holloway now briefly told him his stage-coach adventure, and concluded
by saying, he was afraid that the mulatto woman should recollect either
his face or voice, and should _blow him_.

"And what," said Howard, shocked at the selfishness which Holloway
showed--"and what do you want me to do? why do you tell me all this?"

"Because," said Holloway, "I thought if you heard what the woman said,
when she saw me, you would have got it all out of her to be sure;
therefore I thought it best to trust you with my secret, and so put
you upon honour with me. All I ask of you is, to hold your tongue about
my--my--my--frolic, and just make some excuse for my not going into the
room again where the mulatto woman is: you may tell Supine, if he asks
what's become of me, that I'm gone to the music-shop, to get some new
music for him: that will keep him quiet. Good by."

When Howard returned to the room where the mulatto woman lay, he
expected to be questioned by Mr. Supine about Holloway's sudden
departure; but this gentleman was not in the habit of paying great
attention to his pupil's motions. He took it for granted that Holloway
had escaped, because he did not wish to be called upon for a charitable
subscription. From the same fear, Mr. Supine affected unusual absence
of mind whilst Mr. Russell talked to the mulatto woman, and at length,
professing himself unable to endure any longer the smell of smoke, he
pushed his way into the street. "Mr. Holloway, I suppose," said he, "has
taken himself home, very wisely, and I shall follow him: we make it
a rule, I think, to miss one another; but to keep a young man in
leading-strings would be a great bore. We're upon the best footing in
the world together: as to the rest--"

New difficulties awaited Holloway. He got home some time before Mr.
Supine, and found his friend, the stage-coachman, waiting for him with a
rueful face.

"Master," said he, "here's a sad job: there was a parcel lost last
night, in the confusion of the overturn of the coach; and I must make it
good; for it's booked, and it's booked to the value of five guineas, for
it was a gold muslin gown that a lady was very particular about; and,
master, I won't peach if you'll pay: but as for losing my place, or
making up five guineas afore Saturday, it's what I can't take upon me to
do."

Holloway was much dismayed at this news; he now began to think he should
pay too dear for his frolic. The coachman persisted in his demand. Mr.
Supine appeared at the corner of the street; and his pupil was forced to
get rid immediately of the coachman, by a promise, that the money should
be ready on Saturday. When Holloway made this promise, he was not master
of two guineas in the world; how to procure the whole sum was now the
question. Alderman Holloway, with the hope of exciting in his son's mind
a love for literature, made it a practice to reward him with solid gold,
whenever he brought home any certificate of his scholarship. Holloway
had lately received five guineas from his father, for an approved copy
of Latin verses; and the alderman had promised to give him five guineas
more if he brought home the medal which was to be the reward for the
best essay in the periodical paper, which the Westminster boys were now
writing. Holloway, though he could write elegant Latin verses, had not
any great facility in English composition; he, consequently, according
to the usual practice of little minds, undervalued a talent which he did
not possess. He had ridiculed the scheme of writing an English essay,
and had loudly declared, that he did not think it worth his while
to write English. His opinion was, however, somewhat changed by his
father's promised reward; and the stage-coachman's impatience for his
money now impelled Holloway to exertion. He began to write his
essay late on Friday evening--the medal was to be given on Saturday
morning--so that there could not be much time for revisal and
corrections. Corrections he affected to disdain, and piqued himself upon
the rapidity with which he wrote. "Howard," said he, when they met to
deliver in their compositions, "you have been three weeks writing your
essay; I ran mine off in three hours and a quarter."

Mr. Holloway had not considered, that what is written with ease is
not always read with ease. His essay was written with such a careless
superfluity of words, and such a lack of ideas appeared in the
performance, that the judges unanimously threw it aside, as unworthy
of their notice. "Gentlemen," cried Dr. B., coming forward among the
anxious crowd of expectants, "which of you owns this motto?--

     "'Hear it, ye Senates, hear this truth sublime,
     He who allows oppression shares the crime{6}.'"

{Footnote 6: Botanic Garden, vol. ii.}

"It's his!--it's his!--it's his!" exclaimed little Oliver, clapping his
hands--"it's Howard's, sir."

Dr. B., pleased with this grateful little boy's honest joy, put the
medal into his hands, without speaking, and Oliver ran with it to his
friend. "Only," said he, "only let me be by, when you show it to your
aunt."

How much the pleasure of success is increased by the sympathy of our
friends! The triumph of a school-boy over his competitors is sometimes
despicable; but Howard's joy was not of this selfish and puerile
sort. All the good passions had stimulated him to exertion, and he was
rewarded by his own generous feelings. He would not have exchanged the
delight which he saw in his little friend Oliver's face, the approving
smile of his aunt, and the proud satisfaction Mr. Russell expressed at
the sight of his medal, for all the solid gold which Alderman Holloway
deemed the highest reward of literature.

Alderman Holloway was filled with indignation when he heard from Mr.
Supine that his son's essay had been rejected with contempt. The young
gentleman was also much surprised at the decision of the judges; and his
tutor, by way of pleasing his pupil's friends, hesitated not to
hint, that there "certainly was great injustice done to Mr. Augustus
Holloway's talents." The subject was canvassed at a turtle dinner at the
alderman's. "There shall not be injustice done to my Augustus," said
the irritated father, wisely encouraging his Augustus in all his mean
feelings. "Never mind 'em all, my boy; you have a father, you may thank
Heaven, who _can_ judge for himself, and _will_: you shall not be the
loser by Dr. B.'s or doctor any body's injustice; I'll make it up to
you, my boy; in the meantime, join us in a bumper of port. Here's to
Dr. B.'s better judgment; wishing him health and happiness these Easter
holidays, and _a new pair of spectacles_,--hey, Mr. Supine?"

This well-chosen toast was drunk with much applause and laughter by the
company. The alderman insisted upon having his Augustus's essay produced
in the evening. Holloway had now ample satisfaction, for the whole
company were unanimous in their plaudits, after Mr. Supine had read two
or three sentences: the alderman, to confirm his own critical judgment,
drew out his purse, and counting out ten bright guineas, presented them,
with a look of high self-satisfaction, to his son. "Here, Augustus, my
boy," said he; "I promised you five guineas if you brought me home the
prize medal; but I now present you with ten, to make you the amends you
so richly deserve, for not having got their medal. Thank God, I am
able to afford it; and I hope," added the alderman, looking round, and
laughing, "I hope I'm as good a patron of the _belles lettres_ as the
head doctor of Westminster himself."

Holloway's eyes sparkled with joy at the sight of the glittering bribe.
He began some speech in reply, in which he compared his father to
Maecenas; but being entangled in a sentence, in which the nominative
case had been too long separated from the verb, he was compelled
to pause abruptly. Nevertheless, the alderman rubbed his hands with
exultation; and "Hear him! hear him!--hear your member!" was vociferated
by all the friends of the young orator. "Well, really," concluded
his mother to the ladies, who were complimenting her upon her son's
performance, "it was not a bad speech, considering he had nothing to
say!"

Lord Rawson, who was one of the company, now congratulated his friend
in a whisper--"You've made a good job of it to-day, Augustus," said he:
"solid pudding's better than empty praise. We're going," continued his
lordship to the alderman, "to try my new horses this evening;" and he
pulled Augustus with him out of the room.

"There they go," said the prudent father, delighted with his own son's
being the chosen friend of a nobleman--"there they go, arm in arm, a
couple of rare ones: we shall have fine work with them, I foresee, when
Augustus gets to college--but young men of spirit must not be
curbed like common boys--we must make allowances--I have been young
myself,--hey, Mr. Supine?"

"Certainly, sir," said the obsequious tutor; "and you still have all the
sprightliness of youth; and my ideas of education square completely with
yours."

According to Alderman Holloway's ideas of education, the holy days were
always to be made a season of complete idleness and dissipation, to
relieve his son from his school studies. It was his great delight to
contrast the pleasures of home with the hardships of school, and to
make his son compare the indulgence of a father with the severity of
a schoolmaster. How he could expect an education to succeed which
he sedulously endeavoured to counteract, it may be difficult for any
rational person to conceive.

After Lord Rawson and Holloway had enjoyed the pleasures of driving the
new horses, _tandem_, in a dog-cart, and had conversed about dogs and
horses till they had nothing left to say to each other, his lordship
proposed stepping in to Mr. Carat, the jeweller's shop, to look at some
new watches: his lordship said he was tired of his own, for he had had
it six months. Mr. Carat was not in the way when they first went in.
One of the young men who attended in the shop said, "that his master was
extremely busy, in settling some accounts with a captain of a ship, who
was to leave England in a few days."

"Don't tell me of settling accounts," cried Lord Ramon--"I hate the
sound of settling accounts: run and tell Mr. Carat that Lord Rawson is
here, and must speak to him this instant, for I'm in a desperate hurry."

A quarter of an hour elapsed before the impatient lord could be obeyed;
during this time, his lordship and Holloway rummaged over every thing
in the shop. A pretty bauble to hang to his watch caught his lordship's
fancy. His lordship happened to have no money in his pocket. "Holloway,"
said he, "my good fellow, you've ten guineas in your pocket, I know; do
lend me them here." Holloway, rather proud of his riches, lent his ten
guineas to his noble friend with alacrity; but a few minutes afterward
recollected that he should want five of them that very night, to pay
the poor stage-coachman. His recollection came too late, for after
Lord Rawson had paid three or four guineas for his trinket, he let the
remainder of the money down with an absent nonchalance, into his pocket.
"We'll settle--I'll pay you, Holloway, to-morrow morning, you know."

Holloway, from false shame, replied, "Oh, very well." And at this
instant Mr. Carat entered the shop, bowing and apologizing to his
lordship for having been busy.

"I'm always, to be sure, in a very great hurry," cried Lord Rawson; "I
never have a minute that I can call my own. All I wanted though,
just now, was to tell you, that I could not settle any thing--you
understand--till we come back from Marryborough. I go down there
to-morrow."

The Jew bowed with unlimited acquiescence, assuring his lordship that
he should ever wait his perfect convenience. As he spoke, he glanced an
inquiring eye upon Holloway.

"Mr. Holloway, the eldest, the only son of Alderman Holloway--rich as
a Jew! and he'll soon leave Westminster," whispered Lord Rawson to the
Jew. "Holloway," continued he, turning to his friend, "give me leave to
introduce Mr. Carat to you. You may," added his lordship, lowering his
voice, "find this Jew a useful friend some time or other, my lad. He's
my man in all money jobs."

The Jew and the school-boy seemed equally flattered and pleased by this
introduction; they were quickly upon familiar terms with one another;
and Mr. Carat, who was willing that such an acquaintance should begin in
the most advantageous and agreeable manner on his part, took the young
gentleman, with an air of mystery and confidence, into a little
room behind the shop; there he produced a box full of old-fashioned
secondhand trinkets, and, without giving Holloway time to examine them,
said that he was going to make a lottery of these things. "If I had any
young favourite friends," continued the wily Jew, "I should give them
a little whisper in the ear, and bid them try their fortune; they never
will have a finer opportunity." He then presented a hand-bill, drawn up
in a style which even Messrs. Goodluck and Co. need not have disdained
to admire. The youth was charmed with the composition. The Jew made him
a present of a couple of tickets for himself, and gave him a dozen more,
to distribute amongst his companions at Westminster. Holloway readily
undertook to distribute the tickets upon condition that he might have
a list of the prizes in the lottery. "If they don't see a list of the
prizes," said he, "not a soul will put in."

The Jew took a pen immediately, and drew up a captivating list of
prizes.

Holloway promised to copy it, because Mr. Carat said his hand must not
appear in the business, and it must be conducted with the strictest
secrecy; because "the law," added the Jew, "has a little jealousy of
these sort of things--government likes none but licensed lotteries,
young gentleman."

"The law! I don't care what the law likes," replied the school-boy; "if
I break the law, I hope I'm rich enough to pay the forfeit, or my father
will pay for me, which is better still."

To this doctrine the Jew readily assented, and they parted, mutually
satisfied with each other.

It was agreed that Lord Rawson should drive his friend to Marryborough
the next Tuesday, and that he should return on Wednesday, with Holloway,
to Westminster, on purpose that he might meet Mr. Carat there, who was
then to deliver the prizes.

"I'll lay you a bet," cried Lord Rawson, as he left the Jew's, "that
you'll have a prize yourself. Now are you not obliged to me for
introducing you to Carat?"

"Yes, that I am," replied Holloway; "it's easier to put into the lottery
than to write Latin verses and English essays. I'll puzzle and bore
myself no more with those things, I promise my father."

"Who does, after they've once left school, I want to know?" said his
noble friend. "I'm sure I've forgot all I ever learned from Latin and
Greek fellows; you know they tell just for nothing when one gets into
the world. I make it a principle never to talk of books, for nobody
does, you know, that has any thing else to talk of. None but quizzes and
quozzes ever came out with any thing of that sort. Now, how they'd stare
at Marryborough, Holloway, if you were to begin sporting some of your
Horace and Virgil!"

The dashing, yet bashful school-boy, with much emotion, swore that he
cared as little for Horace and Virgil as his lordship did. Holloway was
really an excellent scholar, but he began to be heartily ashamed of
it in his lordship's company, and prudently resolved to adopt the
principles he had just heard; to forget as fast as possible all he had
learned: never to talk of books; and to conceal both his knowledge and
his abilities, lest _they should stare at him at Maryborough_.

The lottery tickets were easily disposed of amongst the young gentlemen
at Westminster. As young men can seldom calculate, they are always ready
to trust to their individual good fortune, and they are, consequently,
ever ready to put into any species of lottery.

"Look here!" cried little Oliver, showing a lottery ticket to
Howard; "look what Holloway has just offered to give me, instead of
half-a-guinea, which he owes me. I told him I would just run and ask
your advice. Shall I accept of it?"

"I would advise you not," answered Howard; "you are sure of your
half-guinea, and you have only a chance of getting any thing in the
lottery."

"Oh, but then I've a chance of such a number of fine things! You have
not seen the list of prizes. Do you know there's a watch amongst them?
Now, suppose my ticket should come up a prize, and that I should get
a watch for my half-guinea!--a real watch!--a watch that would go!--a
watch that I should wind up myself every night! O Charles! would not
that be a good bargain for my half-guinea? I'm sure you have not read
the list of prizes, have you?"

"No, I have not," said Howard: "have you seen the list of blanks?"

"Of blanks! No," said Oliver, with a changed countenance; "I never
thought of the blanks."

"And yet in most lotteries there are many more blanks than prizes, you
know."

"Are there? Well, but I hope I shall not have a blank," said Oliver.

"So every body hopes, but some people must be disappointed."

"Yes," said the little boy, pausing--"but then some people must win, and
I have as good a chance as another, have not I?"

"And do you know what the chance against your winning is? Once I had a
great mind, as you have now, Oliver, to put into a lottery. It was just
after my aunt lost all her fortune, and I thought that if I were to get
the twenty thousand pound prize, I could give it to her."

"I'll give my watch (if I get it, I mean) to somebody. I'll give it to
the mulatto woman, because she is poor. No; I'll give it to you, because
you are the best, and I love you the best, and I am more obliged to you
than to any body in the world, for you have taught me more; and you
have taught me as I was never taught before, without laughing at, or
scolding, or frightening, or calling me blockhead or dunce; and you have
made me think a great deal better of myself; and I am always happy when
I'm with you; and I'm quite another creature since you came to school. I
hope you'll never leave school whilst I am here," cried Oliver.

"But you have quite forgot the lottery," said Howard, smiling, and much
touched by his little friend's simplicity and enthusiasm.

"Oh, the lottery! ay," said Oliver, "you were telling me something about
yourself; do go on."

"I once thought, as you do now, that it would be a charming thing to put
into a lottery."

"Well, and did you win?"

"No."

"Did you lose?"

"No."

"How then?"

"I did not put into the lottery, for I was convinced that it was a
foolish way of spending money."

"If you think it's foolish or wrong," said Oliver, "I'll have nothing to
do with this lottery."

"I don't want to govern you by my opinion," said Howard; "but if you
have patience to attend to all the reasons that convinced me, you will
be able to judge, and form an opinion for yourself. You know I must
leave school some time or other, and then--"

"Well, don't talk of that, but tell me all the reasons, quick."

"I can't tell them so very quickly," said Howard, laughing: "when we go
home this evening I'll ask my aunt to look for the passage in Smith's
Wealth of Nations, which she showed me."

"Oh!" interrupted Oliver, with a sigh, "_Smith's Wealth_ of what? That's
a book, I'm sure, I shall never be able to understand; is it not that
great large book that Mr. Russell reads?"

"Yes."

"But I shall never understand it."

"Because it's a large book?"

"No," said Oliver, smiling, "but because I suppose it's very difficult
to understand."

"Not what I've read of it: but I have only read passages here and there.
That passage about lotteries, I think, you would understand, because it
is so plainly written."

"I'll read it, then," said Oliver, "and try; and in the meantime I'll
go and tell Holloway that I had rather not put into the lottery, till I
know whether it's right or not."

Holloway flew into a violent passion with little Oliver when he went
to return his lottery ticket. He abused and ridiculed Howard for his
interference, and succeeded so well in raising a popular cry, that the
moment Howard appeared on the playground, a general hiss, succeeded by
a deep groan, was heard.--Howard recollected the oracle's answer to
Cicero, and was not dismayed by the voice of the multitude. Holloway
threw down half-a-guinea, to pay Oliver, and muttered to himself, "I'll
make you remember this, Mr. Oliver."

"I'll give this half-guinea to the mulatto woman, and that's much better
than putting it into a lottery, Charles," said the little boy; and,
as soon as the business of the day was done, Oliver, Howard, and Mr.
Russell, took their usual evening's walk towards the gardener's house.

"Ay, come in," cried old Paul, "come in! God bless you all! I don't know
which is the best of you. I've been looking out of my door this quarter
of an hour for ye," said he, as soon as he saw them; "and I don't know
when I've been idle a quarter of an hour afore. But I've put on my best
coat, though it's not Sunday, and wife has treated her to a dish of tea,
and she's up and dressed--the mulatto woman, I mean--and quite hearty
again. Walk in, walk in; it will do your hearts good to see her; she's
so grateful too, though she can't speak good English, which is her only
fault, poor soul; but we can't be born what we like, or she would have
been as good an Englishman as the best of us. Walk in, walk in.--And the
chimney does not smoke, master, no more than I do; and the window opens
too; and the paper's up, and looks beautiful. God bless ye, God bless
ye--walk in." Old Paul, whilst he spoke, had stopped the way into the
room; but at length he recollected that they could not walk in whilst he
stood in the door-way, and he let them pass.

The little room was no longer the smoky, dismal, miserable place which
it was formerly. It was neatly papered; it was swept clean; there was a
cheerful fire, which burnt quite clearly: the mulatto woman was cleanly
dressed, and, rising from her work, she clasped her hands together with
an emotion of joyful gratitude, which said more than any words could
have expressed.

This room was not papered, nor was the chimney cured of smoking, nor
was the woman clad in new clothes, by magic. It was all done by human
means--by the industry and abilities of a benevolent boy.

The translation of the little French book, which Howard had completed,
procured him the means of doing good. The book-seller to whom he offered
it was both an honest man, and a good judge of literary productions. Mr.
Russell's name also operated in his pupil's favour, and Howard received
ten guineas for his translation.

Oliver was impatient for an opportunity to give his half-guinea, which
he had held in his hand, till it was quite warm. "Let me look at that
pretty thimble of yours," said he, going up to the mulatto woman, who
had now taken up her work again; and, as he playfully pulled off the
thimble, he slipped his half-guinea into her hand; then he stopped her
thanks, by running on to a hundred questions about her thimble. "What
a strange thimble! How came you by such a thimble? Was it given to you?
Did you buy it? What's the use of this screw round the inside of the rim
of it? Do look at it, Charles!"

The thimble was, indeed, remarkable; and it seemed extraordinary that
such a one should belong to a poor woman, who had lately been in great
distress.

"It is gold," said Mr. Russell, examining it, "and very old gold."

The mulatto woman sighed; and as she put the thimble upon her finger
again, said, that she did not know whether it was gold or not; but she
had a great value for it; that she had had it a great many years; that
it had been given to her by the best friend she had ever had.

"Tell me about that best friend," said Oliver; "I like to hear about
best friends."

"She was a very good friend indeed; though she was but young, scarcely
bigger than yourself, at the time she gave me this thimble: she was my
young mistress; I came all the way from Jamaica on purpose to find her
out, and in hopes to live with her in my elder days."

"Jamaica!" cried Howard; "Jamaica!" cried Oliver, in the same breath;
"what was her name?"

"Frances Howard."

"My aunt," exclaimed Howard.

"I'll run and tell her; I'll run and bring her here, this instant!" said
Oliver. But Mr. Russell caught hold of him, and detained him, whilst
they further questioned the woman. Her answers were perfectly consistent
and satisfactory. She said, that her mistress's estate in Jamaica had
been sold just before she left the island; that some of the old slaves
had been set at liberty, by orders, which came, she understood, in her
mistress's last letter; and that, amongst the rest, she had been freed:
that she had heard say that her good mistress had desired the agent to
give her also some little _provision ground_, upon the plantation, but
that this had never been done; and that she had sold all the clothes and
little things she possessed, to raise money to pay for her passage to
England, hoping to find her mistress in London. She added, that the
agent had given her a direction to her mistress; but that she had, in
vain, applied at at the house, and at every house in the same street.
"Show us the direction, if you have it," said Mr. Russell. The woman
said she had kept it very carefully; but now it was almost worn out. The
direction was, however, still legible upon the ragged bit of paper which
she produced--_To Mrs. Frances Howard, Portman Square, London_. The
instant Mr. Russell was satisfied, he was as expeditious as Oliver
himself; they all three went home immediately to Mrs. Howard: she had,
some time before, been confined to her room by a severe toothache.

"You promised me, aunt," said her nephew, "that as soon as you were well
enough, you would go to old Paul's with us, to see our poor woman; can
you go this evening?"

"Oh do! do, pray; I'm sure you won't catch cold," said Oliver; "for we
have a very particular reason for wishing you to go."

"There is a sedan chair at the door," said Mr. Russell, "if you are
afraid, madam, of catching cold."

"I am not rich enough to go out in sedan chairs," interrupted Mrs.
Howard, "nor prudent enough, I am afraid, to stay at home."

"Oh! thank you," said Oliver, who had her clogs ready in his hands; "now
you'll see something that will surprise you."

"Then take care you don't tell me what it is, before I see it," said
Mrs. Howard.

Oliver, with some difficulty, held his tongue during the walk, and
contented himself with working off his superfluous animation, by jumping
over every obstacle in his way.

The meeting between the poor mulatto woman and her mistress was as full
of joy and surprise as little Oliver had expected; and this is saying
a great deal, for where much is expected, there is usually much
disappointment; and very sympathetic people are often angry with others,
for not being as much astonished, or as much delighted, as they think
the occasion requires.

The day which Mr. Augustus Holloway imagined would bring him such
complete felicity--the day on which Lord Rawson had promised to call
for him in his dog-cart, and to drive him down _randem-tandem_, to
Marryborough--was now arrived. His lordship, in his dog-cart, was at
the door; and Holloway, in high spirits, was just going to get into the
carriage, when some one pulled his coat, and begged to speak a few words
with him. It was the stage-coachman, who was absolutely in distress for
the value of the lost parcel, which Holloway had promised him should be
punctually paid: but Holloway, now that his excursion to Marryborough
was perfectly secure, thought but very little of the poor coachman's
difficulties; and though he had the money, which he had raised by the
lottery tickets, in his pocket, he determined to keep that for his
amusements during the Easter holidays. "You must wait till I come back
from Marryborough; I can't possibly speak to you now; I can't possibly,
you see, keep Lord Rawson waiting. Why didn't you call sooner? I am not
at all convinced that any parcel was lost."

"I'll show you the books--it's book'd, sir," said the man, eagerly.

"Well, well, this is not a time to talk of booking. I'll be with you
in an instant, my lord," cried Holloway to Lord Rawson, who was all
impatience to _be off_. But the coachman would not quit his hold. "I'm
sorry to come to that, master," said he: "as long as we were both upon
honour together, it was very well; but, if you break squares with me,
being a gentleman, and rich, you can't take it ill, I being a poor man
and my place and all at stake, if I take the shortest way to get my
own: I must go to Dr. B. for justice, if you won't give it me without my
peaching," said the coachman.

"I'll see you again to-morrow morning," said Holloway, alarmed: "we come
up to town again to-morrow."

"To-morrow won't do," said the coachman; "I shall lose my place and my
bread to-day. I know how to trust to young gentlemen's to-morrows."

A volley of oaths from Lord Rawson again summoned his companion. At
this instant, Mr. Russell, young Howard, and little Oliver, came up
the street, and were passing on to Mrs. Howard's, when Holloway stopped
Howard, who was the last of the party. "For Heaven's sake," said he, in
a whisper, "do settle for me with this confounded coachman! I know you
are rich; your bookseller told me so; pay five guineas for me to him,
and you shall have them again to-morrow, there's a good fellow. Lord
Rawson's waiting; good by."

"Stay, stay," said Howard, who was not so easily to be drawn into
difficulties by a moment's weakness, or by the want of a moment's
presence of mind: "I know nothing of this business; I have other uses
for my money; I cannot pay five guineas for you, Holloway."

"Then let it alone," cried Holloway, with a brutal execration; and
he forcibly broke from the coachman, shook hands with his tutor, Mr.
Supine, who was talking to Lord Rawson about the varnish of his gig,
jumped into the carriage, and was whirled away from all reflection in a
moment, by his noble companion.

The poor coachman entreated Howard to stay one instant, to hear him. He
explained the business to him, and reproached himself bitterly for
his folly. "I'm sure I thought," said he, "I was sure of a gentleman's
honour; and young gentlemen ought to be above not paying handsome for
their frolics, if they must have frolics; and a frolic's one thing, and
cheating a poor man like me is another; and he had liked to have killed
a poor mulatto woman, too, by the overturn of the coach, which was all
his doings."

"The woman is got very well, and is very well off now," interrupted
Howard; "you need say nothing about that."

"Well, but my money, I must say about _that_," said the coachman. Here
Howard observed, that Mr. Supine had remained at the door in a lounging
attitude, and was quite near enough to overhear their conversation.
Howard, therefore, to avoid exciting his attention by any mysterious
whispers, walked away from the coachman; but in vain; he followed: "I'll
peach," said he; "I must in my own defence."

"Stay till to-morrow morning," said Howard: "perhaps you'll be paid
then."

The coachman, who was a good-natured fellow, said, "Well, I don't like
making mischief among young gentlemen; I will wait till to-morrow, but
not a day more, master, if you'd go down on your knees to me."

Mr. Supine, whose curiosity was fully awake, called to the coachman the
moment Howard was out of hearing, and tried, by various questions, to
draw the secret from him. The words, "_overturn of the coach--mulatto
woman_," and the sentence, which the irritated coachman had pronounced
in a raised voice, that "_young gentlemen should be above not paying
handsome for their frolics_," had reached Mr. Supine's attentive ear,
before Howard had been aware that the tutor was a listener. Nothing more
could Mr. Supine draw, however, from the coachman, who now felt himself
_upon honour_, having promised Howard not to _peach_ till the next
morning. Difficulties stimulated Mr. Supine's curiosity; but he remained
for the present satisfied in the persuasion that he had discovered _a
fine frolic_ of the immaculate Mr. Charles Howard; his own pupil he did
not suspect upon this occasion. Holloway's whisperings with the coachman
had ended the moment Mr. Supine appeared at the door, and the tutor had
in the same moment been so struck with the beautiful varnish of Lord
Rawson's dog-cart, that his pupil might have whispered longer, without
rousing his attention. Mr. Supine was further confirmed in his mistake
about Howard, from the recollection of the mulatto woman, whom he had
seen at the gardener's: he knew that she had been hurt by a fall from a
stage-coach. He saw Howard much interested about her. All this he joined
with what he had just overheard about _a frolic_, and he was rejoiced at
the idea of implicating in this business Mr. Russell, whom he disliked.

Mr. Supine, having got rid of his pupil, went immediately to Alderman
Holloway's, where he had a general invitation to dinner. Mrs. Holloway
approved of her son's tutor, full as much for his love of gossiping, as
for his musical talents: Mr. Supine constantly supplied her with news
and anecdotes; upon the present occasion, he thought that his story,
however imperfect, would be eagerly received, because it concerned
Howard.

Since the affair of the prize essay, and the medal, Mrs. Holloway had
taken a dislike to young Howard, whom she considered as the enemy of
her dear Augustus. No sooner had she heard Mr. Supine's blundering
information, than, without any farther examination, she took the whole
for granted: eager to repeat the anecdote to Mrs. Howard, she instantly
wrote a note to her, saying that she would drink tea with her that
evening.

When Mrs. Holloway, attended by Mr. Supine, went, in the evening, to
Mrs. Howard's, they found with her Mrs. B., the lady of Dr. B., the
master of Westminster School.

"Is not this an odd rencontre?" whispered Mrs. Holloway to Mr. Supine,
as she drew him to a recessed window, commodious for gossiping: "I shall
be called a tell-tale, I know, at Westminster; but I shall tell our
story, notwithstanding. I would keep any other boy's secret; but Howard
is such a saint: and I hate saints."

A knock at the door interrupted Mrs. Holloway; she looked out of the
window. "Oh, here he comes, up the steps," continued she, "after his
sober evening promenade, and _his_ Mr. Russell with--and, I declare, the
mulatto woman with him. Now for it!"

Howard entered the room, went up to his aunt, and said, in a low
voice,--

"Ma'am, poor Cuba is come; she is rather tired with walking, and she is
gone to rest herself in the front parlour."

"Her lameness, though," pursued little Oliver, who followed Howard into
the room, "is almost well. I just asked her how high she thought the
coach was from which she was--"

A look from Howard made Oliver stop short; for though he did not
understand the full meaning of it, he saw it was designed to silence
him. Howard was afraid of betraying Holloway's secret to Mr. Supine or
to Mrs. Holloway: his aunt sent him out of the room with some message to
Cuba, which gave Mrs. Holloway an opportunity of opening her business.

"Pray," said she, "might I presume to ask--for I perceive the young
gentleman has some secret to keep from me, which he may have good
reasons for--may I, just to satisfy my own mind, presume to ask whether,
as her name leads one to guess, your Cuba, Mrs. Howard, is a mulatto
woman?"

Surprised by the manner of the question, Mrs. Howard coldly replied,
"Yes, madam--a mulatto woman."

"And she is lame, I think, sir, you mentioned?" persisted the curious
lady, turning to little Oliver.

"Yes, she's a little lame still; but she will soon be quite well."

"Oh! then, her lameness came, I presume, from an accident, sir, and not
from her birth?"

"From an accident, ma'am."

"Oh! an accident--a fall--a fall from a coach--from a stage-coach,
perhaps," continued Mrs. Holloway, smiling significantly at Mr.
Supine: "you take me for a conjuror, young gentleman, I see by your
astonishment," continued she to Oliver; "but a little bird told me the
whole story; and I see Mrs. Howard knows how to keep a secret as well as
myself."

Mrs. Howard looked for an explanation.

"Nay," said Mrs. Holloway, "you know best, Mrs. Howard; but as we're
all _out of school_ now, I shall not be afraid to mention such a little
affair, even before the doctor's lady; for, to be sure, she would never
let it reach the doctor's ears."

"Really, ma'am," said Mrs. Howard, "you puzzle me a little; I wish you
would explain yourself: I don't know what it is that you would not have
reach the doctor's ears."

"You don't?--well, then, your nephew must have been very clever, to have
kept you in the dark; mustn't he, Mr. Supine?"

"I always, you know, thought the young gentleman very _clever_, ma'am,"
said Mr. Supine, with a malicious emphasis.

Mrs. Howard's colour now rose, and with a mixture of indignation and
anxiety she pressed both Mr. Supine and Mrs. Holloway to be explicit. "I
hate mysteries!" said she. Mrs. Holloway still hung back, saying it
was a tender point; and hinting, that it would lessen her esteem and
confidence in one most dear to her, to hear the whole truth.

"Do you mean Howard, ma'am?" exclaimed little Oliver: "oh, speak! speak!
it's impossible Charles Howard can have done any thing wrong."

"Go for him, my dear," said Mrs. Howard, resuming her composure; "let
him be present. I hate mysteries."

"But, my dear Mrs. Howard," whispered Mrs. Holloway, "you don't
consider; you'll get your nephew into a shocking scrape; the story will
infallibly go from Mrs. B. to Dr. B. You are warm, and don't consider
consequences."

"Charles," said Mrs. Howard to her nephew, the moment he appeared, "from
the time you were five years old, till this instant, I have never known
you tell a falsehood; I should, therefore, be very absurd, as well as
very unjust, if I were to doubt your integrity. Tell me--have you got
into any difficulties? I would rather hear of them from yourself,
than from any body else. Is there any mystery about overturning a
stage-coach, that you know of, and that you have concealed from me?"

"There is a mystery, ma'am, about overturning a stage-coach," replied
Howard, in a firm tone of voice; "but when I assure you that it is no
mystery of mine--nothing in which I have myself any concern--I am sure
that you will believe me, my dear aunt, and that you will press me no
further."

"Not a word further, not a frown further," said his aunt, with a smile
of entire confidence; in which Mr. Russell joined, but which appeared
incomprehensible to Mr. Supine.

"Very satisfactory indeed!" said that gentleman, leaning back in the
chair; "I never heard any thing more satisfactory to my mind!"

"Perfectly satisfactory, upon my word!" echoed Mrs. Holloway; but
no looks, no inuendoes, could now disturb Mrs. Howard's security,
or disconcert the resolute simplicity which appeared in her nephew's
countenance. Mrs. Holloway, internally devoured by curiosity, was
compelled to submit in silence. This restraint soon became so irksome to
her, that she shortened her visit as much as she decently could.

In crossing the passage, to go to her carriage, she caught a glimpse
of the mulatto woman, who was going into a parlour. Resolute, at all
hazards, to satisfy herself, Mrs. Holloway called to the retreating
Cuba--began by asking some civil questions about her health; then spoke
of the accident she had lately met with; and, in short, by a skilful
cross-examination, drew her whole story from her. The gratitude with
which the poor woman spoke of Howard's humanity was by no means pleasing
to Mr. Supine.

"Then it was not he who overturned the coach?" said Mrs. Holloway.

The woman eagerly replied, "Oh no, madam!" and proceeded to draw, as
well as she could, a description of the youth who had been mounted
upon the coach-box: she had seen him only by the light of the moon, and
afterwards by the light of a lantern; but she recollected his figure so
well, and described him so accurately, that Mr. Supine knew the picture
instantly, and Mrs. Holloway whispered to him, "Can it be Augustus?"

"Mr. Holloway!--Impossible!--I suppose--"

But the woman interrupted him by saying that she recollected to have
heard the young gentleman called by that name by the coachman.

The mother and the tutor were nearly alike confounded by this discovery.
Mrs. Holloway got into her carriage, and, in their way home, Mr. Supine
represented, that he should be ruined for ever with the alderman, if
this transaction came to his knowledge; that, in fact, it was a mere
boyish frolic; but that the alderman might not consider it in
that light, and would, perhaps, make Mr. Augustus feel his serious
displeasure. The foolish mother, out of mistaken good-nature, at length
promised to be silent upon the subject. But, before he slept, Alderman
Holloway heard the whole story. The footman, who had attended the
carriage, was at the door when Mrs. Holloway was speaking to the mulatto
woman, and had listened to every word that was said. This footman was in
the habit of telling his master, when he attended him at night, all the
news which he had been able to collect in the day. Mr. Supine was no
favourite of his; because, whenever the tutor came to the house, he gave
a great deal of trouble, being too indolent to do any thing for himself,
and yet not sufficiently rich, or sufficiently generous, to pay the
usual premiums for the active civility of servants. This footman was not
sorry to have an opportunity of repeating any story that might injure
Mr. Supine with his master. Alderman Holloway heard it under the promise
of concealing the name of the person who had given him the information,
and resolved to discover the truth of the affair the next day, when he
was to visit his son at Westminster.

But we must now return to Mrs. Howard's. We mentioned that Mrs. B. spent
the evening with her. Dr. B., soon after Mrs. Holloway went away, called
to take his lady home: he had been engaged to spend the evening at a
card assembly; but, as he was a man who liked agreeable conversation
better than cards, he had made his escape from a rout, to spend half an
hour with Mrs. Howard and Mr. Russell. The doctor was a man of various
literature; able to appreciate others, he was not insensible to the
pleasure of seeing himself appreciated. Half an hour passes quickly in
agreeable conversation: the doctor got into an argument, concerning the
propriety of the distinction made by some late metaphysical writers,
between imagination and fancy. Thence he was led to some critical
remarks upon Warton's beautiful Ode to Fancy; then to the never-ending
debate upon original genius; including also the doctrine of hereditary
temper and dispositions, which the doctor warmly supported, and which
Mrs. Howard coolly questioned.

In the midst of their conversation, they were suddenly interrupted by a
groan. They all looked round to see whence it came. It came from little
Oliver: he was sitting at a little table at the farther end of the room,
reading so intently in a large book that he saw nothing else: a long
unsnuffed candle, with a perilous fiery summit to its black wick, stood
before him, and his left arm embraced a thick china jar, against which
he leaned his head. There was, by common consent, a general silence
in the room, whilst every one looked at Oliver, as at a picture. Mrs.
Howard moved gently round behind his chair, to see what he was reading:
the doctor followed her. It was the account of the execution of two
rebel Koromantyn negroes, related in Edwards's History of the West
Indies{7}. To try whether it would interrupt Oliver's deep attention,
Mrs. Howard leaned over him, and snuffed his dim candle; but the light
was lost upon him--he did not feel the obligation. Dr. B. then put his
hand upon the jar, which he pulled from Oliver's embrace. "Be quiet! I
must finish this!" cried Oliver, still holding fast the jar, and keeping
his eyes upon the book. The doctor gave a second pull at the jar, and
the little boy made an impatient push with his elbow; then casting his
eye upon the large hand which pulled the jar, he looked up, surprised,
in the doctor's face.

{Footnote 7: Vol. ii. p. 57, second edition.}

The nice china jar, which Oliver had held so sturdily, was very
precious to him. His uncle had just sent him two jars of fine West India
sweetmeats. One of these he had shared with his companions: the other
he had kept, to give to Mrs. Howard, who had once said, in his hearing,
that she was fond of West India sweetmeats. She accepted Oliver's
little present. Children sometimes feel as much pleasure in giving away
sweetmeats as in eating them; and Mrs. Howard too well understood the
art of education, even in trifles, to deny to grateful and generous
feelings their natural and necessary exercise. A child can show
gratitude and generosity only in trifles.

"Are these all the sweetmeats that you have left, Oliver?" said Mrs.
Howard.

"Yes--all."

"Was not Rousseau wrong, Dr. B.," said Mrs. Howard, "when he asserted,
that no child ever gives away _his last mouthful_ of any thing good?"

"Of any thing _good_!" said the doctor, laughing; "when I have tasted
these sweetmeats, I shall be a better judge."

"You shall taste them this minute, then," said Mrs. Howard; and she
rang for a plate, whilst the doctor, to little Oliver's great amusement,
exhibited various pretended signs of impatience, as Mrs. Howard
deliberately untied the cover of the jar. One cover after another she
slowly took off; at length the last transparent cover was lifted up: the
doctor peeped in; but lo! instead of sweetmeats there appeared nothing
but paper. One crumpled roll of paper after another Mrs. Howard pulled
out; still no sweetmeats. The jar was entirely stuffed with paper, to
the very bottom. Oliver was silent with amazement.

"The sides of the jar are quite clean," said Howard.

"But the inside of the paper that covered it is stained with
sweetmeats," said Dr. B.

"There must have been sweetmeats in it lately," said Mrs. Howard,
"because the jar smells so strongly of them."

Amongst the pieces of crumpled paper which had been pulled out of the
jar, Dr. B. espied one, on which there appeared some writing: he looked
it over.

"Humph! What have we here? What's this? What can this he about a
lottery?--tickets, price half a guinea--prizes-gold watch!--silver
ditto--chased tooth-pick case--buckles--knee-buckles. What is all
this?--April 10th, 1797--the drawing to begin--prizes to be delivered
at Westminster school, by Aaron Carat, jeweller? Hey, young gentlemen,"
cried Dr. B., looking at Oliver and Charles, "do you know any thing of
this lottery?"

"I have no concern in it, sir, I assure you," said Howard.

"Nor I, thank goodness--I mean, thank you, Charles," exclaimed Oliver;
"for you hindered me from putting into the lottery: how very lucky I was
to take your advice!"

"How very wise, you should say, Oliver," said Dr. B. "I must inquire
into this business; I must find out who ordered these things from Mr.
Aaron Carat. There shall be no lotteries, no gaming at Westminster
school, whilst I have power to prevent it. To-morrow morning I'll
inquire into this affair; and to-morrow morning we shall also know, my
little fellow, what became of your sweetmeats."

"Oh, never mind _that_," cried the good-natured Oliver; "don't say any
thing, pray, sir, about my sweetmeats: I don't mind about them; I know
already--I guess now, who took them; therefore you need not ask; I dare
say it was only meant for a joke."

Dr. B. made no reply; but folded up the paper which he had been reading,
put it into his pocket, and soon after took his leave.

Lord Rawson was one of those young men who measure their own merit and
felicity by the number of miles which their horses can go in a day; he
undertook to drive his friend up from Marryborough to Westminster, a
distance of forty miles, in five hours. The arrival of his lordship's
gig was a signal, for which several people were in waiting at
Westminster school. The stage-coachman was impatiently waiting to demand
his money from Holloway. Mr. Carat, the jeweller, was arrived, and eager
to settle with Mr. Holloway about the lottery: he had brought the prizes
in a small case, to be delivered, upon receiving from Holloway the money
for all the tickets of which he had disposed. Dr. B. was waiting for the
arrival of Mr. Holloway, as he had determined to collect all his pupils
together, and to examine into the lottery business. Little Oliver was
also watching for Holloway, to prevent mischief, and to assure him of
forgiveness about the sweetmeats.

Lord Rawson's dog-cart arrived. Holloway saw the stage-coachman as
he alighted, and, abruptly turning from him, shook hands with little
Oliver, saying, "You look as if you had been waiting for me."

"Yes," said Oliver: "but I can't say what I want to say before every
body."

"I'll wait upon you presently," said Holloway, escaping from the
coachman. As he crossed the hall, he descried Mr. Carat, and a crowd
of boys surrounding him, crying, "Mr. Carat's come--he has brought
the prizes!--he has brought the prizes! he'll show them all as soon as
you've settled with him." Holloway called to the Jew; but little Oliver
insisted upon being heard first.

"You must hear me: I have something to say to you about the
prizes--about the lottery."

The words arrested Holloway's attention: he followed Oliver; heard with
surprise and consternation the history of the paper which had been found
in the jar, by Dr. B. "I've done for myself, now, faith!" he exclaimed;
"I suppose the doctor knows all about the hand _I_ have in the lottery."

"No," replied Oliver, "he does not."

"Why, _you_ must have known it; and did not he question you and Howard?"

"Yes; but when we told him that we had nothing to do with it, he did not
press us farther."

"You are really a noble little fellow," exclaimed Holloway, "to bear me
no malice for the many ill turns I have done you: this last has
fallen upon myself, as ill-luck would have it: but before we go any
farther--your sweetmeats are safe in the press, in my room; I didn't
mean to steal them; only to plague you, child:--but you have your
revenge now."

"I don't want any revenge, indeed," said Oliver, "for I'm never happy
when I've quarrelled with any body: and even when people quarrel with
me, I don't feel quite sure that I'm in the right, which makes me
uncomfortable; and, besides, I don't want to find out that they are
quite in the wrong; and that makes me uncomfortable the other way.
After all, quarrelling and bearing malice are very disagreeable things,
somehow or other. Don't you, when you have made it up with people, and
shaken hands, Holloway--don't you feel quite light, and ready to jump
again? So shake hands, if you are not above shaking hands with such a
little boy as I am; and I shall never think again about the sweetmeats,
or old _fag_ times."

Holloway could not help feeling touched. "Here's my hand," cried he,
"I'm sorry I've tormented you so often; I'll never plague you any more.
But now--I don't know what upon earth to do. Where's Charles Howard? If
he can't help me, I'm undone. I have got into more scrapes than I can
get out of, I know. I wish I could see Howard."

"I'll run and bring him to you; he's the best person at knowing what
should be done--at least for me, I know--that ever I saw."

Holloway abruptly began, as soon as Howard came up to him: "Howard,"
said he, "you know this plaguy lottery business--but you don't know
half yet: here's Carat come to be paid for his tickets; and here's that
dunning stage-coachman sticks close to me for his five guineas; and not
one farthing have I upon earth."

"Not a farthing! but you don't mean that you have not the money for Mr.
Carat?"

"But I _do_ though."

"Why, you cannot have spent it since yesterday morning?"

"No; but I have lost half and lent half; and the half that I have lent
is gone for ever, I am afraid, as much as that which I lost."

"Whom did you lend the money to? How did you lose it?"

"I lost part to Sir John O'Shannon, last night, at billiards--more fool
I to play, only because I wanted to cut a figure amongst those fine
people at Marryborough. I wonder my father lets me go there; I know
I sha'n't go back there this Easter, unless Lord Rawson makes me an
apology, I can tell him. I've as good a right to be upon my high horse
as he has; for though his father's an earl, my father's a great deal
richer, I know; and has lent him a great deal of money, too, and that's
the only reason he's civil to us; but I can tell him--"

Here Howard brought the angry Holloway from his high horse, by asking
what all this had to do with Mr. Carat, who was waiting to be paid?

"Why, don't I explain to you," said Holloway, "that I lent _him_--Lord
Rawson, I mean--all the money I had left yesterday, and I couldn't
get it out of him again, though I told him my distress about the
stage-coachman? Did you ever know any thing so selfish? Did you ever
know any thing so shabby, so shameful? And then to make me his butt,
as he did last night at supper, because there were two or three dashing
young men by; I think more of _that_ than all the rest. Do you know, he
asked me to eat custard with my apple-pie, just to point me out for
an alderman's son; and when I only differed from him about Captain
Shouldham's puppy's ears, Lord Rawson said, to be sure, I must know
about dog's ears, just to put me in mind that I was a school-boy; but
I'll never go to Marryborough any more, unless he begs my pardon. I've
no notion of being a humble friend; but it does not signify being in a
passion about it now," continued Holloway. "What I want you, Howard, to
do for me is, just to think; for I can't think at present, I'm in such a
hurry, with all these things coming across me at once. What can I do to
find money for the stage-coachman and for Mr. Carat? Why both together
come to fifteen guineas. And what can I do about Dr. B.? And, do you
know, my father is coming here this very morning. How shall I manage?
He'd never forgive me: at least he'd not give me any money for I don't
know how long, if these things were to come out. What would you advise
me to do?"

Howard, with his usual honest policy, advised Holloway at once to tell
all the circumstances to his father. Holloway was at first much alarmed
at this proposal, and insisted upon it that this method would not _do at
all_ with the alderman, though it might do very well with such a woman
as Mrs. Howard. At length, however, overcome, partly by the arguments,
and partly by the persuasion of his new adviser, Holloway determined
upon his confession.

Alderman Holloway arrived, and was beginning to talk to Dr. B. of his
son's proficiency in his studies, when the young gentleman made his
appearance, with a countenance extremely embarrassed and agitated. The
sight of Dr. B. deprived Holloway of courage to speak. The doctor fixed
his penetrating eye upon the pale culprit, who immediately stopped short
in the middle of the room, stammering out, "I came to speak, sir--I had
something to say to my father, sir--I came, if you please, to speak to
my father, sir." To Holloway's utter astonishment, Dr. B.'s countenance
and manner suddenly changed at these words; all his severity vanished;
and, with a look and voice the most encouraging, he led the abashed
youth towards his father.

"You came to speak to your father, sir? Speak to him then without fear,
without reserve: you will certainly find in a father your most indulgent
friend. I'll leave you together."

This opening of the case by Dr. B. was of equal advantage both to the
father and to the son. Alderman Holloway, though without literature, was
not without understanding: his affection for his son made him quickly
comprehend the good sense of the doctor's hint. The alderman was not
_surprised_ by the story of the overturn of the stage-coach, because he
had heard it before from his footman. But the lottery transaction with
the Jew--and, above all, with the loss and loan of so much money to his
friend, Lord Rawson--struck him with some astonishment; yet he commanded
his temper, which was naturally violent; and, after a constrained
silence, he begged his son to summon Mr. Supine. "At least," cried the
alderman, "I've a right to be in a passion with that careless, indolent,
dilettanti puppy, whom I've been paying all this while for taking such
care of you. I wish I had hold of his German flute at this instant.
You are very right, Augustus, to come like a man, and tell me all
these things; and now I must tell you, that some of them I had heard of
before. I wish I had that Jew, that Mr. Carat of yours, here! and that
stage-coachman, who had the impertinence to take you out with him at
night. But it's all Mr. Supine's fault--and mine, for not choosing a
better tutor for you. As to Lord Rawson, I can't blame you either much
for that, for I encouraged the connexion, I must own. I'm glad you have
quarrelled with him, however; and pray look out for a better friend as
fast as possible. You were very right to tell me all these things; on
that consideration, and that only, I'll lend my hand to getting you out
of these scrapes."

"For that," cried Holloway, "I may thank Howard, then; for he advised
and urged me to tell you all this at once."

"Call him; let me thank him," said the alderman; "he's an excellent
young man then--call him."

Dr. B. now entered the room with little Oliver.

When Holloway returned with Howard, he beheld the stage-coachman
standing silent on one side of his father; Mr. Carat, the Jew, on the
other side, jabbering an unintelligible vindication of himself; whilst
Dr. B. was contemplating the box of lottery prizes, which lay open upon
the table. Mr. Supine, leaning against the chimney-piece, appeared in
the attitude of an Antinous in despair.

"Come, my little friend," said Dr. B. to Oliver, "you did not put into
the lottery, I understand. Choose from amongst these things whatever
you please. It is better to trust to prudence than fortune, you see. Mr.
Howard, I know that I am rewarding you, at this instant, in the manner
you best like, and best deserve."

There was a large old-fashioned chased gold toothpick-case, on which
Oliver immediately fixed his eye. After examining it very carefully,
he drew the doctor aside, and, after some consultation, Oliver left the
room hastily; whilst the alderman, with all the eloquence of which he
was master, expressed his gratitude to Howard for the advice which he
had given his son. "Cultivate this young gentleman's friendship," added
he, turning to Holloway: "he has not a title; but even _I_, Augustus,
am now ready to acknowledge he is worth twenty Lord Rawsons. Had he a
title, he would grace it; and that's as much as I can say for any man."

The Jew, all this time, stood in the greatest trepidation; he trembled
lest the alderman should have him taken up and committed to gaol for his
illegal, unlicensed lottery. He poured forth as many protestations as
his knowledge of the English language could afford of the purity of his
intentions; and, to demonstrate his disinterestedness, began to display
the trinkets in his prize-box, with a panegyric upon each. Dr. B.
interrupted him, by paying for the toothpick-case, which he had bought
for Oliver.

"Now, Mr. Carat," said the doctor, "you will please to return, in the
first place, the money you have received for your _illegal_ lottery
tickets."

The word _illegal_, pronounced in a tremendous tone, operated
instantaneously upon the Jew; his hand, which had closed upon Holloway's
guineas, opened; he laid the money down upon the table, but mechanically
seized his box of trinkets, which he seemed to fear would be the next
seized, as forfeits. No persons are so apprehensive of injustice
and fraud as those who are themselves dishonest. Mr. Carat, bowing
repeatedly to Alderman Holloway, shuffled toward the door, asking if he
might now depart; when the door opened with such a force, as almost to
push the retreating Jew upon his face.

Little Oliver, out of breath, burst into the room, whispered a few words
to Dr. B. and Alderman Holloway, who answered, "He may come in;" and
a tall, stout man, an officer from Bow-street, immediately entered.
"There's your man, sir," said the alderman, pointing to the Jew; "there
is Mr. Carat." The man instantly seized Mr. Carat, producing a warrant
from Justice--for apprehending the Jew upon suspicion of his having in
his possession certain valuable jewels, the property of Mrs. Frances
Howard.

Oliver was eager to explain. "Do you know, Howard," said he, "how all
this came about? Do you know your aunt's gone to Bow-street, and has
taken the mulatto woman with her, and Mr. Russell is gone with her?
and she thinks--and _I_ think--she'll certainly have her jewels, her
grandmother's jewels, that were left in Jamaica."

"How? but how?" exclaimed Howard.

"Why," said Oliver, "by the toothpick-case. The reason I chose that
toothpick-case out of the Jew's box was, because it came into my head,
the minute I saw it, that the mulatto woman's curious thimble--you
remember her thimble, Howard--would just fit one end of it. I ran home
and tried it, and the thimble screwed on as nicely as possible; and
the chasing, as Mr. Russell said, and the colour of the gold, matched
exactly. Oh! Mrs. Howard was so surprised when we showed it to her--so
astonished to see this toothpick-case in England; for it had been left,
she said, with all her grandmother's diamonds and _things_, in Jamaica."

"Yes," interrupted Howard; "I remember my aunt told us, when you asked
her about Cuba's thimble, that she gave it to Cuba when she was a child,
and that it belonged to some old trinket.--Go on."

"Well, where was I?--Oh, then, as soon as she saw the toothpick-case,
she asked how it had been found; and I told her all about the lottery
and Mr. Carat; then she and Mr. Russell consulted, and away they went,
with Cuba, in a coach; and all the rest you know; and I wish I could
hear the end of it!"

"And so you shall, my good little fellow; we'll all go together to hear
the Jew's examination: you shall go with me in my coach to Bow-street,"
said Alderman Holloway.

In the midst of their bustle, the poor stage-coachman, who had waited
with uncommon patience in the hope that Alderman Holloway would at
last recollect him, pressed forward, and petitioned to be paid his five
guineas for the lost parcel.--"I have lost my place already," said he,
"and the little goods I have will be seized this day, for the value of
that unlucky parcel, master."

The alderman put his hand slowly into his purse; but just when he had
pulled out five guineas, a servant came into the room, to inform Dr. B.
that a sailor was waiting in the hall, who desired to speak, directly,
about something of consequence, to the stage-coachman.

Dr. B., who imagined that the sailor might have something to do with the
business in question, ordered that he might be shown into the room.

"I wants one Gregory Giles, a stage-coachman, if such a one be here
amongst ye, gentlefolks, and nobody else," cried the sailor, producing a
parcel, wrapped up in brown paper.

"It's my very parcel!" exclaimed the stage-coachman. "I am Gregory
Giles! God bless your honest heart!--Where did ye find it?--Give it me!"

The sailor said he had found it in a dry ditch on the Bath road,
a little beyond the first turnpike, going out of town; that he had
inquired at the turnpike-house; had heard that the stage had been
overturned a few days before, and that a parcel had been lost, about
which the coachman had been in great trouble; that he had gone directly
to the inn where the coach put up; had traced the coachman from place to
place; and was heartily glad he had found him at last.

"Thank'ee, with all my heart," said the coachman, "for all the trouble
you've been at; and here's the crown reward that I offered for it, and
my thanks into the bargain."

"No, no," said the honest sailor, pushing back the money; "I won't take
any thing from a poor fellow like myself: put your silver into your
pocket: I hear you lost your place already by that parcel. There was
a great talk at the turnpike-house about your losing your place, for
giving some young gentleman a lift.--Put up your money."

All present were eager in rewarding the honest sailor.

A hackney-coach was now come to the door for Mr. Carat, and every body
hurried off as fast as possible.

"Where are they all steering to?" said the sailor. The stage-coachman
told him all that he had heard of the matter. "I'll be in their
wake, then," cried the sailor; "I shall like to see the Jew upon his
court-martial; I was choused once by a Jew myself." He got to Bow-street
as soon as they did.

The first thing Howard learned was, that the jewels, which had been all
found at Mr. Carat's, precisely answered the description which his aunt
had given of them. The Jew was in the utmost consternation: finding that
the jewels were positively sworn to, he declared, upon his examination,
that he had bought them from a captain of a ship; that he had paid the
full value for them; and that, at the time he purchased them, he had
no suspicion of their having been fraudulently obtained. This defence
appearing evidently evasive, the magistrates who examined Mr. Carat
informed him, that, unless he could produce the person from whom he had
bought the jewels, he must be committed to Newgate for receiving stolen
goods. Terrified at this sentence, the Jew, though he had at first
asserted that he knew nothing of the captain from whom he had received
the diamonds, now acknowledged that he actually lodged at his house.

"Hah!" exclaimed Holloway: "I remember, the day that I and Lord Rawson
called at your house, you were settling accounts, your foreman told us,
with a captain of a ship, who was to leave England in a few days: it's
well he's not off."

An officer was immediately sent to Mr. Carat's in quest of this captain;
but there were great apprehensions that he might have escaped at the
first alarm of the search for the jewels. Fortunately, however, he had
not been able to get off, as two constables had been stationed at
Mr. Carat's house. The officer from Bow-street found him in his own
bed-chamber, rummaging a portmanteau for some papers, which he wanted
to burn. His papers were seized, and carried along with him before the
magistrate.

Alderman Holloway knew the captain the moment he was brought into the
room, though his dress and whole appearance were very different from
what they had been when he had waited upon the alderman some months
before this time, with a dismal, plausible story of his own poverty
and misfortunes. He had then told him that his mate and he had had
a quarrel, upon the voyage from Jamaica; that the mate knew what a
valuable cargo he had on board; that just when they got in sight of
land, the crew rose upon him; the mate seized him, and by force put him
into a boat, and set him ashore.

The discovery of the jewels at Mr. Carat's at once overturned the
captain's whole story: cunning people often insert something in their
narration to make it better, which ultimately tends to convict them
of falsehood. The captain having now no other resource, and having the
horrors of imprisonment, and the certainty of condemnation upon a public
trial, full before him, threw himself, as the only chance that remained
for him, upon Mrs. Howard's mercy; confessed that all that he had told
her before was false; that his mate and he had acted in concert; that
the rising of the crew against him had been contrived between them; that
he had received the jewels, when he was set ashore, for his immediate
share of the booty; and that the mate had run the ship off to
Charlestown, to sell her cargo. According to agreement, the captain
added, he was to have had a share in the cargo; but the mate had
_cheated him_ of that; he had never heard from him, or of him, he would
take his oath, from the day he was set ashore, and knew nothing of him
or the cargo.

"Avast, friend, by your leave," cried the honest sailor who had found
the stage-coachman's parcel--"avast, friend, by your leave," said he,
elbowing his way between Alderman Holloway and his next neighbour,
and getting clear into the middle of the circle--"I know more of this
matter, _my lord_, or please your worship, which is much the same thing,
than any body here; and I'm glad on't, mistress," continued the tar,
pulling a quid of tobacco out of his mouth, and addressing himself to
Mrs. Howard: then turning to the captain, "Wasn't _she_ the _Lively
Peggy_, pray?--it's no use tacking. Wasn't your mate one John Matthews,
pray? Captain, your face tells truth, in spite of your teeth."

The captain instantly grew pale, and trembled: on which the sailor
turned abruptly from him, and went on with his story. "Mistress," said
he, "though I'm a loser by it, no matter. The Lively Peggy and her cargo
are safe and sound in Plymouth, at this very time being, and we have her
mate in limbo, curse him. We made a prize of him, coming from America,
for he was under French colours, and a fine prize we thought we'd made.
But her cargo belongs to a British subject; and there's an end to our
prize money: no matter for that. There was an ugly look with Matthews
from the first; and I found, the day we took her, something odd in the
look of her stern. The rascals had done their best to paint over her
name; but _I_, though no great scholar, made a shift to spell the Lively
Peggy through it all. We have the mate in limbo at Plymouth: but it's
all come out, without any more to do; and, mistress, I'll get you her
bill of lading in a trice, and I give ye joy with all my heart."

Alderman Holloway, a man used to business, would not indulge himself in
a single compliment upon this occasion, till he had cautiously searched
the captain's papers. The bill of lading which had been sent with the
Lively Peggy from Jamaica, was found amongst them; it was an exact list,
corresponding precisely with that which Mrs. Howard's agent had sent her
by post, of the consignment shipped after the sale of her plantation.
The alderman, satisfied, after counting the puncheons of rum and
hogsheads of sugar, turned to Mrs. Howard, and shook hands with her,
with a face of mercantile congratulation, declaring that "she was now as
good a woman as ever she had been, and need never desire to be better."

"My dear Oliver," cried Howard, "this is all owing to you: _you_
discovered--"

"No, no, no!" interrupted Oliver, precipitately: "all that I did was
accident; all that you did was not accident. You first made me love you,
by teaching me that I was not a blockhead, and by freeing me from--"

"_A tyrant_, you were going to say," cried Holloway, colouring deeply;
"and, if you had, you'd have said the truth. I thought; Howard,
_afterwards_, that you were a brave fellow for taking his part, I
confess. But, Oliver, I thought you had forgiven me for all these
things."

"Forgiven! Oh yes, to be sure," cried little Oliver; "I wasn't thinking
of myself, or you either; I was only thinking of Howard's good nature;
and then," continued he, "Howard was just as good to the mulatto woman
as he was to me--wasn't he, Cuba?"

"That he was!" replied the poor woman; and, looking at Mrs. Howard,
added, "Massa's _heart_ as good as hers."

"And his _head's_ as good as his heart, which makes it all better
still," continued Oliver, with enthusiasm. "Mr. Russell, you know how
hard he worked at that translation, to earn money to support poor
Cuba, and to paper the room, and to pay the bricklayer _for_ the smoky
chimney: these things were not done by accident, were they? though it
was by accident that I happened to observe Cuba's curious thimble."

"There are some people," interrupted Mr. Russell, "who, by accident,
never observe any thing. We will not allow you, Oliver, to call your
quick habit of observation accident; your excellent capacity will--"

"_My_ excellent capacity," repeated Oliver, with unfeigned surprise:
"why, you know, I get by rote slower than any body in the world."

"You may," said Dr. B., "notwithstanding, have an excellent capacity:
much may be learned without books; much more with books, Oliver; but,
for your comfort, you need not learn them by rote."

"I'm glad of it, heartily," cried Oliver; "but this put something out
of my head that I was in a great hurry to say--O, one other thing
about _accident_. It was not _accident_, but it was Howard's sense, in
persuading me not to put into the lottery, that was the very cause of
Dr. B.'s giving me the choice of all the things in the Jew's box--was it
not?"

"Well, Oliver, we are ready to allow all you want us to perceive, in one
word, that your friend Howard _has not been educated by accident_," said
Dr. B., looking at Mrs. Howard.

The Jew and the captain of the Lively Peggy were now left in the hands
of the law. The sailor was properly rewarded. Mr. Russell was engaged to
superintend the education of Holloway. He succeeded, and was presented
by the alderman with a living in Surrey. Mr. Supine never visited Italy,
and did not meet with any consolation but in his German flute. Howard
continued eager to improve himself; nor did he imagine that, the moment
he left school, and parted from his tutor, his education was finished,
and that his books were, "like past misfortunes," good for nothing
but to be forgotten. His love for literature he found one of the first
pleasures of his life; nor did he, after he came into the possession of
a large fortune, find that his habits of constant occupation lessened
his enjoyments, for he was never known to yawn at a window upon a rainy
morning!

Little Oliver's understanding rapidly improved; his affection for his
friend Howard increased as he grew up, for he always remembered that
Howard was the first person who discovered that he was not a dunce. Mrs.
Howard had the calm satisfaction of seeing an education well finished,
which she had well begun; and she enjoyed, in her nephew's friendship,
esteem, and unconstrained gratitude, all the rewards which her good
sense, firmness, and benevolence had so well deserved.



ANGELINA; OR, L'AMIE INCONNUE.



CHAPTER I.

"But, my dear Lady Di., indeed you should not let this affair prey so
continually upon your spirits," said Miss Burrage, in the condoling tone
of a humble companion--"you really have almost fretted yourself into a
nervous fever. I was in hopes that change of air, and change of scene,
would have done every thing for you, or I never would have consented
to your leaving London; for you know your ladyship's always better in
London than any where else. And I'm sure your ladyship has thought and
talked of nothing but this sad affair since you came to Clifton."

"I confess," said Lady Diana Chillingworth, "I deserve the reproaches
of my friends for giving way to my sensibility, as I do, upon this
occasion: but I own I cannot help it.--Oh, what will the world say! What
will the world say!--The world will lay all the blame upon _me_; yet I'm
sure I'm the last, the very last person that ought to be blamed."

"Assuredly," replied Miss Burrage, "nobody can blame your ladyship;
and nobody will, I am persuaded. The blame will all be thrown, where it
ought to be, upon the young lady herself."

"If I could but be convinced of that," said her ladyship, in a tone of
great feeling; "such a young creature, scarcely sixteen, to take such
a step!--I am sure I wish to Heaven her father had never made me her
guardian. I confess, I was most exceedingly imprudent, out of regard
to her family, to take under my protection such a self-willed,
unaccountable, romantic girl. Indeed, my dear," continued Lady Diana
Chillingworth, turning to her sister, Lady Frances Somerset, "it was you
that misled me. You remember you used to tell me, that Anne Warwick had
such great abilities!"--

"That I thought it a pity they had not been well directed," said Lady
Frances.

"And such generosity of temper, and such warm affections!" said Lady
Di.--

"That I regretted their not having been properly cultivated."

"I confess, Miss Warwick was never a great favourite of mine," said Miss
Barrage; "but now that she has lost her best friend--"

"She is likely to find a great number of enemies," said Lady Frances.

"She has been her own enemy, poor girl! I am sure I pity her," replied
Miss Burrage; "but, at the same time, I must say, that ever since she
came to my Lady Di. Chillingworth's, she has had good advice enough."

"Too much, perhaps; which is worse than too little," thought Lady
Frances.

"Advice!" repeated Lady Di. Chillingworth: "why, as to that, my
conscience, I own, acquits me there; for, to be sure, no young person,
of her age, or of any age, had ever more advice, or more good advice,
than Miss Warwick had from me; I thought it my duty to advise her, and
advise her I did from morning till night, as Miss Burrage very well
knows, and will do me the justice, I hope, to say in all companies."

"_That_ I shall certainly make it a principle to do," said Miss Burrage.
"I am sure it would surprise and grieve you, Lady Frances, to hear
the sort of foolish, imprudent things that Miss. Warwick, with all her
abilities, used to say. I recollect--"

"Very possibly," replied Lady Frances; "but why should we trouble
ourselves to recollect all the foolish, imprudent things which this poor
girl may have said?--This unfortunate elopement is a sufficient proof of
her folly and imprudence. With whom did she go off?"

"With nobody," cried Lady Diana--"there's the wonder."

"With nobody!--Incredible.--She had certainly some admirer, some lover,
and she was afraid, I suppose, to mention the business to you."

"No such thing, my dear: there is no love at all in the case: indeed,
for my part, I cannot in the least comprehend Miss Warwick, nor ever
could. She used, every now and then, to begin and talk to me some
nonsense about her hatred of the forms of the world, and her love
of liberty, and I know not what; and then she had some female
correspondent, to whom she used to write folio sheets, twice a week, I
believe; but I could never see any of these letters. Indeed, in town,
you know, I could not possibly have leisure for such things; but Miss
Burrage, I fancy, has one of the letters, if you have any curiosity
to see it. Miss Burrage can tell you a great deal more of the whole
business than I can; for you know, in London, engaged as I always was,
with scarcely a moment ever to myself, how could I attend to all Anne
Warwick's oddities? I protest I know nothing of the matter, but that,
one morning, Miss Warwick was nowhere to be found, and my maid brought
me a letter, of one word of which I could not make sense: the letter was
found on the young lady's dressing-table, according to the usual custom
of eloping heroines. Miss Burrage, do show Lady Frances the letters--you
have them somewhere; and tell my sister all you know of the matter,
for I declare, I'm quite tired of it; besides, I shall be wanted at the
card-table."

Lady Diana Chillingworth went to calm her sensibility at the card-table;
and Lady Frances turned to Miss Burrage, for further information.

"All I know," said Miss Burrage, "is, that one night I saw Miss Warwick
putting a lock of frightful hair into a locket, and I asked her whose it
was.--'My amiable Araminta's,' said Miss Warwick, 'Is she pretty?' said
I. 'I have never seen her,' said Miss Warwick; 'but I will show you a
charming picture of her mind!'--and she put this long letter into my
hand. I'll leave it with your ladyship, if you please; it is a good, or
rather a bad hour's work to read it."

"_Araminta!_" exclaimed Lady Frances, looking at the signature of the
letter--"this is only a nom de guerre, I suppose."

"Heaven knows!" answered Miss Burrage; "but Miss Warwick always signed
her epistles Angelina, and her _unknown friend's_ were always signed
Araminta. I do suspect that Araminta, whoever she is, was the instigator
of this elopement."

"I wish," said Lady Frances, examining the post-mark of the letter,
"I wish that we could find out where Araminta lives; we might then,
perhaps, recover this poor Miss Warwick, before the affair is talked of
in the world--before her reputation is injured."

"It would certainly be a most desirable thing," said Miss Burrage; "but
Miss Warwick has such odd notions, that I question whether she will ever
behave like other people; and, for my part, I cannot blame Lady Diana
Chillingworth for giving her up. She is one of those young ladies whom
it is scarcely possible to manage by common sense."

"It is certainly true," said Lady Frances, "that young women of Miss
Warwick's superior abilities require something more than _common_ sense
to direct them properly. Young ladies who think of nothing but dress,
public amusements, and forming what they call high connexions, are
undoubtedly most easily managed, by the fear of what the world will
say of them; but Miss Warwick appeared to me to have higher ideas of
excellence; and I therefore regret that she should be totally given up
by her friends."

"It is Miss Warwick who has given up her friends," said Miss Burrage,
with a mixture of embarrassment and sarcasm in her manner; "it is Miss
Warwick who has given up her friends; not Miss Warwick's friends who
have given up Miss Warwick."

The letter from the "amiable Araminta," which Miss Burrage left for
the pervsal of Lady Frances Somerset, contained three folio sheets, of
which, it is hoped, the following abridgment will be sufficiently ample
to satisfy the curiosity even of those who are lovers of long letters:--

"Yes, my Angelina! our hearts are formed for that higher species of
friendship, of which common souls are inadequate to form an idea,
however their fashionable puerile lips may, in the intellectual inanity
of their conversation, profane the term. Yes, my Angelina, you are
right--every fibre of my frame, every energy of my intellect, tells
me so. I read your letter by moonlight! The air balmy and pure as my
Angelina's thoughts! The river silently meandering!--The rocks!--The
woods!--Nature in all her majesty. Sublime confidante! Sympathizing with
my supreme felicity. And shall I confess to you, friend of my soul! that
I could not refuse myself the pleasure of reading to my Orlando some of
those passages in your last, which evince so powerfully the superiority
of that understanding, which, if I mistake not strangely, is formed to
combat, in all its Proteus forms, the system of social slavery? With
what soul-rending eloquence does my Angelina describe the solitariness,
the _isolation_ of the heart she experiences in a crowded metropolis!
With what emphatic energy of inborn independence does she
exclaim against the family phalanx of her aristocratic
persecutors!--Surely--surely she will not be intimidated from
'the settled purpose of her soul' by the phantom-fear of worldly
censure!--The garnish-tinselled wand of fashion has waved in vain in
the illuminated halls of folly-painted pleasure; my Angelina's eyes have
withstood, yes, without a blink, the dazzling enchantment.--And will
she--no, I cannot, I will not think so for an instant--will she now
submit her understanding, spell-bound, to the soporific charm of
nonsensical words, uttered in an awful tone by that potent enchantress,
_Prejudice_?--The declamation, the remonstrances of self-elected judges
of right and wrong, should be treated with deserved contempt by superior
minds, who claim the privilege of thinking and acting for themselves.
The words _ward_ and _guardian_ appal my Angelina! but what are legal
technical formalities, what are human institutions, to the view of
shackle-scorning Reason! Oppressed, degraded, enslaved, must our
unfortunate sex for ever submit to sacrifice their rights, their
pleasures, their _will_, at the altar of public opinion; whilst the
shouts of interested priests, and idle spectators, raise the senseless
enthusiasm of the self-devoted victim, or drown her cries in the
truth-extorting moment of agonizing nature!--You will not perfectly
understand, perhaps, to what these last exclamations of your Araminta
allude:--But, chosen friend of my heart!--when we meet--and oh, let
that be quickly!--my cottage longs for the arrival of my unsophisticated
Angelina!--when we meet you shall know all--your Araminta, too, has had
her sorrows--Enough of this!--But her Orlando has a heart, pure as the
infantine god of love could, in his most perfect mood, delight at once
to wound, and own--joined to an understanding--shall I say it?--worthy
to judge of your Araminta's--And will not my sober-minded Angelina
prefer, to all that palaces can afford, such society in a cottage?--I
shall reserve for my next the description of a cottage, which I have in
my eye, within view of--; but I will not anticipate.--Adieu, my
amiable Angelina.--I enclose, as you desire, a lock of my hair.--Ever,
unalterably, your affectionate, though almost heart-broken,

"ARAMINTA.

"April, 1800.--_Angelina Bower!_

"So let me christen my cottage!"

What effect this letter may have on _sober-minded_ readers in general
can easily be guessed; but Miss Warwick, who was little deserving of
this epithet, was so charmed with the sound of it, that it made her
totally to forget to judge of her amiable Araminta's mode of reasoning.
"Garnish-tinselled wands"--"shackle-scorning Reason"--"isolation of
the heart"--"soul-rending eloquence"--with "rocks and woods, and a
meandering river--balmy air--moonlight--Orlando--energy of intellect--a
cottage--and a heart-broken friend," made, when all mixed together,
strange confusion in Angelina's imagination. She neglected to
observe, that her Araminta was in the course of two pages--"almost
heart-broken"--and in the possession of--"supreme felicity."--Yet Miss
Warwick, though she judged so like a simpleton, was a young woman of
considerable abilities: her want of what the world calls common sense
arose from certain mistakes in her education.--She had passed her
childhood with a father and mother, who cultivated her literary taste,
but who neglected to cultivate her judgment: her reading was confined
to works of imagination; and the conversation which she heard was not
calculated to give her any knowledge of realities. Her parents died
when she was about fourteen, and she then went to reside with Lady Diana
Chillingworth, a lady who placed her whole happiness in living in a
certain circle of high company in London. Miss Warwick saw the follies
of the society with which she now mixed; she felt insupportable ennui
from the want of books and conversation suited to her taste; she heard
with impatience Lady Diana's dogmatical advice; observed, with disgust,
the meanness of her companion, Miss Burrage, and felt with triumph the
superiority of her own abilities. It was in this situation of her mind
that Miss Warwick happened, at a circulating library, to meet with a
new novel, called "The Woman of Genius."--The character of Araminta, the
heroine, charmed her beyond measure; and having been informed, by
the preface, that the story was founded on facts in the life of the
authoress herself, she longed to become acquainted with her; and
addressed a letter to "The Woman of Genius," at her publisher's. The
letter was answered in a highly flattering, and consequently, very
agreeable style, and the correspondence continued for nearly two years;
till, at length, Miss W. formed a strong desire to see her _unknown
friend_. The ridicule with which Miss Burrage treated every thing, and
every idea, that was not sanctioned by fashion, and her total want of
any taste for literature, were continually contrasted in Miss Warwick's
mind, with the picture she had formed of her Araminta.--Miss Burrage,
who dreaded, though certainly without reason, that she might be
supplanted in the good graces of Lady Diana, endeavoured by every petty
means in her power, to disgust her young rival with the situation in
which she was placed. She succeeded beyond her hopes. Miss Warwick
determined to accept of her _unknown friend's_ invitation to Angelina
Bower--a charming romantic cottage in South Wales, where, according to
Araminta's description, she might pass her halcyon days in tranquil,
elegant retirement. It was not difficult for our heroine, though unused
to deception, to conceal her project from Lady Diana Chillingworth, who
was much more observant of the appearance of her protégée in public,
than interested about what passed in her mind in private. Miss Warwick
quitted her ladyship's house without the least difficulty, and the
following is the letter which our heroine left upon her dressing-table.
Under all the emphatic words, according to the custom of some
letter-writers, were drawn emphatic lines.

"Averse as I am to every thing that may have the appearance of a
clandestine transaction, I have, however, found myself under the
necessity of leaving your ladyship's house, without imparting to you my
intentions. Confidence and sympathy go hand in hand, nor can either
be _commanded_ by the voice of authority. Your ladyship's opinions and
mine, upon _all_ subjects, differ so _essentially_, that I could never
hope for your approbation, either of my _sentiments_ or my conduct.
It is my _unalterable determination_ to _act_ and _think_ upon every
occasion for myself; though I am well aware, that they who start out of
the common track, either in words or action, are exposed to the ridicule
and persecution of vulgar or illiberal minds. They who venture to carry
the _first_ torch into _unexplored_ or _unfrequented_ passages in the
mine of truth are exposed to the most imminent danger. Rich, however,
are the treasures of the place, and cowardly the soul that hesitates!
But I forget myself.

"It may be necessary to inform your ladyship, that, disgusted with the
frivolity of what is called fashionable life, and _unable_ to _live_
without the higher pleasures of friendship, I have chosen for my asylum
the humble, tranquil cottage of a female friend, whose tastes, whose
principles have long been known to me: whose _genius_ I admire! whose
_virtues_ I revere! whose example I _emulate!_

"Though I do not condescend to use the fulsome language of _a mean
dependant_, I am not forgetful of the kindness I have received from
your ladyship. It has not been without a _painful_ struggle that I have
broken my bonds asunder--the bonds of what is _falsely_ called _duty:
spontaneous_ gratitude ever will have full, _indisputable, undisputed_
power over the _heart_ and _understanding_ of

"ANNE-ANGELINA WARWICK.

"P.S. It will be in vain to attempt to discover the place of my retreat.
All I ask is to be left in peace, to enjoy, in my retirement, _perfect
felicity_."



CHAPTER II.

Full of her hopes of finding "perfect felicity" in her retreat at
Angelina Bower, exulting in the idea of the courage and magnanimity with
which she had escaped from her "aristocratic persecutors," our heroine
pursued her journey to South Wales.

She had the misfortune--and it is a great misfortune to a young lady of
her way of thinking--to meet with no difficulties or adventures, nothing
interesting upon her journey. She arrived, with inglorious safety, at
Cardiffe. The inn at Cardiffe was kept by a landlady of the name of
Hoel. "Not high-born Hoel. Alas!" said Angelina to herself, when the
name was screamed in her hearing by a waiter, as she walked into the
inn. "Vocal no more to high-born Hoel's harp, or soft Llewellynn's lay!"
A harper was sitting in the passage, and he tuned his harp to catch her
attention as she passed. "A harp!--O play for me some plaintive air!"
The harper followed her into a small parlour.

"How delightful!" said Miss Warwick, who, in common with other heroines,
had the habit of talking to herself; or, to use more dignified terms,
who had the habit of indulging in soliloquy:--"how delightful to taste
at last the air of Wales. But 'tis a pity 'tis not North instead of
South Wales, and Conway instead of Cardiffe Castle."

The harper, after he had finished playing a melancholy air, exclaimed,
"That was but a melancholy ditty, miss--we'll try a merrier." And he
began--

"Of a noble race was Shenkin."

"No more," cried Angelina, stopping her ears; "no more, barbarous
man!--you break the illusion."

"Break the what?" said the harper to himself; "I thought, miss, that
tune would surely please you; for it is a favourite one in these parts."

"A favourite with Welsh squires, perhaps," said our heroine; "but,
unfortunately, _I_ am not a Welsh squire, and have no taste for your
'Bumper Squire Jones.'"

The man tuned his harp sullenly. "I'm sorry for it, miss," said he:
"more's the pity, I can't please you better!"

Angelina cast upon him a look of contempt. "He no way fills my idea of a
bard!--an ancient and immortal bard!--He has no soul--fingers without a
soul!--No 'master's hand,' or 'prophet's fire!'--No 'deep sorrows!'--No
'sable garb of woe!'--No loose beard, or hoary hair, 'streaming like a
meteor to the troubled air!'--'No haggard eyes!'--Heigho!"--"It is time
for me to be going," said the harper, who began to think, by the young
lady's looks and manners, that she was not in her right understanding.
"It is time for me to be going; the gentlemen above in the Dolphin will
be ready for me."

"A mere modern harper! He is not even blind," Angelina said to herself,
as he examined the shilling which she gave him. "Begone, for Heaven's
sake!" added she, aloud, as he left the room;--and "leave me, leave
me to repose." She threw up the sash, to taste the evening air; but
scarcely had she begun to repeat a sonnet to her Araminta--scarcely had
she repeated the first two lines--

     "Hail, far-famed, fairest, unknown friend,
     Our sacred silent sympathy of soul,"

when a little ragged Welsh boy, who was playing with his companions, in
a field at the back of Cardifie Inn, espied her, gave the signal to his
playfellows, and immediately they all came running up to the window at
which Angelina was standing, and with one loud shrill chorus of "Gi'
me ha'penny!--Gi' me ha'penny!--Gi' me one ha'penny!" interrupted
the sonnet, Angelina threw out some money to the boys, though she was
provoked by their interruption: her donation was, in the true spirit of
a heroine, much greater than the occasion required and the consequence
was, that these urchins, by spreading the fame of her generosity through
the town of Cardiffe, collected a Lilliputian mob of petitioners, who
assailed Angelina with fresh vehemence. Not a moment's peace, not a
moment for poetry or reverie would they allow her: so that she was
impatient for her chaise to come to the door. Her Araminta's cottage
was but six miles distant from Cardiffe; and to speak in due sentimental
language, every moment that delayed her long-expected interview with her
beloved unknown friend, appeared to her an age.

"And what would you be pleased to have for supper, ma'am?" said the
landlady. "We have fine Tenby oysters, ma'am; and, if you'd like a Welsh
rabbit--"

"Tenby oysters!--Welsh rabbits!" repeated Angelina, in a disdainful
tone. "Oh, detain me not in this cruel manner!--I want no Tenby oysters,
I want no Welsh rabbits; only let me be gone--I am all impatience to
see a dear friend. Oh, if you have any feeling, any humanity, detain me
not!" cried she, clasping her hands.

Miss Warwick had an ungovernable propensity to make a display of
sensibility; a fine theatrical scene upon every occasion; a propensity
which she had acquired from novel-reading. It was never more unluckily
displayed than in the present instance; for her audience and spectators,
consisting of the landlady, a waiter, and a Welsh boy, who just entered
the room with a knife-tray in his hand, were all more inclined to burst
into rude laughter than to join in gentle sympathy. The chaise did not
come to the door one moment sooner than it would have done without this
pathetic wringing of the hands. As soon as Angelina drove from the door,
the landlady's curiosity broke forth--

"Pray tell me, Hugh Humphries," said Mrs. Hoel, turning to the
postilion, who drove Angelina from Newport, "pray, now, does not this
seem strange, that such a young lady as this should be travelling about
in such wonderful haste? I believe, by her flighty airs, she is upon no
good errand--and I would have her to know, at any rate, that she might
have done better than to sneer, in that way, at Mrs. Hoel of Cardiffe,
and her Tenby oysters, and her Welsh rabbit. Oh, I'll make her repent
her _pe_haviour to Mrs. Hoel, of Cardiffe. 'Not high-born Hoel,'
forsooth! How does she know that, I should be glad to hear? The Hoels
are as high born, I'll venture to say, as my young miss herself, I've a
notion! and would scorn, moreover, to have a runaway lady for a relation
of theirs. Oh, she shall learn to repent her disrespects to Mrs. Hoel,
of Cardiffe. I _pe_lieve she shall soon meet herself in the public
newspapers--her eyes, and her nose, and her hair, and her inches, and
her description at full length she shall see--and her friends shall
see it too--and maybe they shall thank, and maybe they shall reward
handsomely Mrs. Hoel, of Cardiffe."

Whilst the angry Welsh landlady was thus forming projects of revenge for
the contempt with which she imagined that her high birth and her Tenby
oysters had been treated, Angelina pursued her journey towards the
cottage of her unknown friend, forming charming pictures, in her
imagination, of the manner in which her amiable Araminta would start,
and weep, and faint, perhaps with joy and surprise, at the sight of her
Angelina. It was a fine moonlight night--an unlucky circumstance; for
the by-road which led to Angelina Bower was so narrow and bad, that
if the night had been dark, our heroine must infallibly have been
overturned, and this overturn would have been a delightful incident in
the history of her journey; but Fate ordered it otherwise. Miss Warwick
had nothing to lament, but that her delicious reveries were interrupted,
for several miles, by the Welsh postilion's expostulations with his
horses.

"Good Heavens!" exclaimed she, "cannot the man hold his tongue? His
uncouth vociferations distract me! So fine a scene, so placid the
moonlight--but there is always something that is not in perfect unison
with one's feelings."

"Miss, if you please, you must light here, and walk for a matter of a
quarter of a mile, for I can't drive up to the house door, because there
is no carriage-road down the lane; but if you be pleased, I'll go on
before you--my horses will stand quite quiet here--and I'll knock the
folks up for you, miss."

"Folks!--Oh, don't talk to me of knocking folks up," cried Angelina,
springing out of the carriage "stay with your horses, man, I beseech
you. You shall be summoned when you are wanted--I choose to walk up to
the cottage alone."

"As you please, miss," said the postilion; "only _hur_ had better take
care of the dogs."

This last piece of sage counsel was lost upon our heroine; she heard it
not--she was "rapt into future times."

"By moonlight will be our first interview--just as I had pictured to
myself--but can this be the cottage?--It does not look quite so romantic
as I expected--but 'tis the dwelling of my Araminta--Happy, thrice
happy moment!--Now for our secret signal--I am to sing the first, and my
unknown friend the second part of the same air."

Angelina then began to sing the following stanza--

     "O waly waly up the bank,
     And waly waly down the brae,
     And waly waly yon burn side,
     Where I and my love were wont to gae."

She sung and paused, in expectation of hearing the second part from her
amiable Araminta--but no voice was heard.

"All is hushed," said Angelina--"ever tranquil be her slumbers! Yet
I must waken her--her surprise and joy at seeing me thus will be so
great!--by moonlight too!"

She knocked at the cottage window--still no answer.

"All silent as night!" said she--

     "'When not a breath disturbs the deep serene,
       And not a cloud o'ercasts the solemn scene.'"

Angelina, as she repeated these lines, stood with her back to the
cottage window: the window opened, and a Welsh servant girl put out her
head; her night-cap, if cap it might be called which shape had none, was
half off, her black hair streamed over her shoulders, and her face was
the face of vulgar, superstitious amazement.

"Oh, 'tis our old ghost of Nelly Gwynn, all in white, walking and saying
her prayers backwards--I heard 'em quite plain, as I hope to breathe,"
said the terrified girl to herself; and, shutting the window with a
trembling hand, she hastened to waken an old woman, who slept in
the same room with her.--Angelina, whose patience was by this time
exhausted, went to the door of the cottage, and shook it with all her
force.--It rattled loud, and a shrill scream was heard from within.

"A scream!" cried Angelina; "Oh, my Araminta!--All is hushed
again."--Then raising her voice, she called as loudly as she could at
the window--"My Araminta! my unknown friend! be not alarmed, 'tis your
Angelina."

The door opened slowly and softly, and a slip-shod beldam peeped out,
leaning upon a stick; the head of Betty Williams appeared over the
shoulder of this sibyl; Angelina was standing, in a pensive attitude,
listening at the cottage window. At this instant the postilion, who was
tired of waiting, came whistling up the lane; he carried a trunk on his
back, and a bag in his hand. As soon as the old woman saw him, she held
up her stick, exclaiming--

"A man! a man!--a ropper and murterer!--Cot suve us! and keep the door
fast polted."--They shut the door instantly.

"What is all this?" said Angelina, with dignified composure.

"A couple of fools, I take it, miss, who are afraid and in tred of
roppers," said the postilion; "put I'll make 'em come out, I'll be
pound, plockheads."--So saying, he went to the door of Angelina Bower,
and thundered and kicked at it, speaking all the time very volubly
in Welsh. In about a quarter of an hour he made them comprehend that
Angelina was a young lady come to visit their mistress: then they came
forth curtsying.

"My name's Betty Williams," said the girl, who was tying a clean cap
under her chin. "Welcome to Llanwaetur, miss!--pe pleased to excuse our
keeping hur waiting, and polting the toor, and taking hur for a ghost
and a ropper--put we know who you are now--the young lady from London,
that we have been told to expect."

"Oh, then, I have been expected; all's right--and my Araminta, where is
she? where is she?"

"Welcome to Llanwaetur, welcome to Llanwaetur, and Cot pless hur pretty
face," said the old woman, who followed Betty Williams out of the
cottage.

"Hur's my grandmother, miss," said Betty.

"Very likely--but let me see my Araminta," cried Angelina: "cruel woman!
where is she, I say?"

"Cot pless hur!--Cot pless hur pretty face," repeated the old woman,
curtsying.

"My grandmother's as deaf as a post, miss--don't mind her; she can't
tell Inglis well, put I can:--who would you pe pleased to have?"

"In plain English, then--the lady who lives in this cottage."

"Our Miss Hodges?"

This odious name of Hodges provoked Angelina, who was so used to call
her friend Araminta, that she had almost forgotten her real name.

"Oh, miss," continued Betty Williams, "Miss Hodges has gone to Pristol
for a few days."

"Gone! how unlucky! my Araminta gone!"

"Put Miss Hodges will pe pack on Tuesday--Miss Hodges did not expect hur
till Thursday--put her ped is very well aired--pe pleased to walk in,
and light hur a candle, and get hur a nightcap."

"Heigho! must I sleep again without seeing my Araminta!--Well, but I
shall sleep in a cottage for the first time in my life--

"'The swallow twittering from the straw-built shed.'"

At this moment, Angelina, forgetting to stoop, hit herself a violent
blow as she was entering Angelina Bower--the roof of which, indeed, "was
too low for so lofty a head."--A headache came on, which kept her awake
the greatest part of the night. In the morning she set about to explore
the cottage; it was nothing like the species of elegant retirement,
of which she had drawn such a charming picture in her imagination. It
consisted of three small bedchambers, which were more like what she had
been used to call closets; a parlour, the walls of which were, in many
places, stained with damp; and a kitchen which smoked. The scanty,
moth-eaten furniture of the rooms was very different from the luxury and
elegance to which Angelina had been accustomed in the apartments of Lady
Diana Chillingworth. Coarse and ill-dressed was the food which Betty
Williams with great bustle and awkwardness served up to her guest;
but Angelina was no epicure. The first dinner which she ate on wooden
trenchers delighted her; the second, third, fourth, and fifth, appeared
less and less delectable; so that by the time she had boarded one week
at her cottage, she was completely convinced that

     "A scrip with herbs and fruit supplied,
     And water from the spring,"

though delightful to Goldsmith's Hermit, are not quite so satisfactory
in actual practice as in poetic theory; at least to a young lady who had
been habituated to all the luxuries of fashionable life. It was in vain
that our heroine repeated

     "Man wants but little here below:"

she found that even the want of double refined sugar, of green tea, and
Mocha coffee, was sensibly felt. Hour after hour, and day after day,
passed with Angelina, in anxious expectation of her Araminta's return
home. Her time hung heavy upon her hands, for she had no companion with
whom she could converse; and one odd volume of Rousseau's Eloise, and a
few well-thumbed German plays, were the only books which she could find
in the house. There was, according to Betty Williams's report, "a vast
sight of books in a press, along with some table-cloths," but Miss
Hodges had the key of this press in her pocket. Deprived of the
pleasures both of reading and conversation, Angelina endeavoured to
amuse herself by contemplating the beauties of nature. There were some
wild, solitary walks in the neighbourhood of Angelina Bower; but though
our heroine was delighted with these, she wanted, in her rambles,
some kindred soul, to whom she might exclaim--"How charming is
solitude{1}!"--The day after her arrival in Wales, she wrote a long
letter to Araminta, which Betty Williams undertook to send by a careful
lad, a particular friend of her own, who would deliver it, without fail,
into Miss Hodges's own hands, and who would engage to bring an answer
by three o'clock the next day. The careful lad did not return till four
days afterward, and he then could give no account of his mission, except
that he had left the letter at Bristol, with a particular friend of his
own, who would deliver it, without fail, into Miss Hodges's own hands,
if he could meet with her. The post seems to be the last expedient which
a heroine ever thinks of for the conveyance of her letters; so that,
if we were to judge from the annals of romance, we should infallibly
conclude there was no such thing as a post-office in England. On the
sixth day of her abode at this comfortless cottage, the possibility of
sending a letter to her friend by the post occurred to Angelina, and she
actually discovered that there was a post-office at Cardiffe. Before she
could receive an answer to this epistle, a circumstance happened, which
made her determine to abandon her present retreat. One evening she
rambled out to a considerable distance from the cottage, and it was long
after sunset ere she recollected that it would be necessary to return
homewards before it grew dark. She mistook her way at last, and
following a sheep-path, down the steep side of a mountain, she came to
a point, at which she, apparently, could neither advance nor recede. A
stout Welsh farmer who was counting his sheep in a field, at the top of
the mountain, happened to look down its steep side in search of one of
his flock that was missing: the farmer saw something white at a distance
below him, but there was a mist--it was dusk in the evening--and whether
it were a woman, or a sheep, he could not he certain. In the hope that
Angelina was his lost sheep, he went to her assistance, and though, upon
a nearer view, he was disappointed, in finding that she was a woman, yet
he had the humanity to hold out his stick to her, and he helped her
up by it, with some difficulty. One of her slippers fell off as she
scrambled up the hill--there was no recovering it; her other slipper,
which was of the thinnest kid leather, was cut through by the stones;
her silk stockings were soon stained with the blood of her tender feet;
and it was with real gratitude that she accepted the farmer's offer, to
let her pass the night at his farmhouse, which was within view. Angelina
Bower was, according to his computation, about four miles distant,
as well, he said, as he could judge of the place she meant by her
description: she had unluckily forgotten that the common name of it
was Llanwaetur. At the farmer's house, she was, at first, hospitably
received, by a tight-looking woman; but she had not been many minutes
seated, before she found herself the object of much curiosity and
suspicion. In one corner of the room, at a small round table, with a
jug of ale before him, sat a man, who looked like the picture of a Welsh
squire: a candle had just been lighted for his worship, for he was
a magistrate, and a great man, in those parts, for he could read the
newspaper, and his company was, therefore, always welcome to the farmer,
who loved to hear the news, and the reader was paid for his trouble with
good ale, which he loved even better than literature.

{Footnote 1: Voltaire.}

"What news, Mr. Evans?" said the farmer.

"What news?" repeated Mr. Evans, looking up from his paper, with a
sarcastic smile. "Why, news that might not be altogether so agreeable to
the whole of this good company; so 'tis best to keep it to ourselves."

"Every thing's agreeable to me, I'm sure," said the farmer--"every
thing's agreeable to me in the way of news."

"And to me, not excepting politics, which you gentlemen always think
so polite," said the farmer's wife, "to keep to yourselves; but,
you recollect, I was used to politics when I lived with my uncle at
Cardiffe; not having, though a farmer's wife, always lived in the
country, as you see, ma'am--nor being quite illiterate.--Well, Mr.
Evans, let us have it. What news of the fleets?"

Mr. Evans made no reply, but pointed out a passage in the newspaper to
the farmer, who leant over his shoulder, in vain endeavouring to spell
and put it together: his smart wife, whose curiosity was at least equal
to her husband's, ran immediately to peep at the wonderful paragraph,
and she read aloud the beginning of an advertisement:--

"Suspected to have strayed, or eloped, from her friends or relations,
a young lady, seemingly not more than sixteen years of age, dressed in
white, with a straw hat: blue eyes, light hair."

Angelina coloured so deeply whilst this was reading, and the description
so exactly suited with her appearance, that the farmer's wife stopped
short; the farmer fixed his eyes upon her; and Mr. Evans cleared his
throat several times with much significance.--A general silence ensued;
at last the three heads nodded to one another across the round table;
the farmer whistled and walked out of the room; his wife fidgeted at a
buffet, in which she began to arrange some cups and saucers; and, after
a few minutes, she followed her husband. Angelina took up the newspaper,
to read the remainder of the advertisement. She could not doubt that it
was meant for her, when she saw that it was dated the very day of her
arrival at the inn at Cardiffe, and signed by the landlady of the
inn, Mrs. Hoel. Mr. Evans swallowed the remainder of his ale, and then
addressed Angelina in these words:--

"Young lady, it is plain to see you know when the cap fits: now, if
you'll take my advice, you'll not make the match you have in your eye;
for, though a lord's son, he is a great gambler. I dined with one that
has dined with him not long ago. My son, who has a living near Bristol,
knows a great deal--more about you than you'd think; and 'tis my advice
to you, which I wouldn't be at the trouble of giving, if you were not as
pretty as you are, to go back to your relations; for he'll never marry
you, and marriage to be sure is your object. I have no more to say,
but only this--I shall think it my duty, as a magistrate, to let
your friends know as soon as possible where you are, coming under
my cognizance as you do; for a vagabond, in the eye of the law, is a
person--"

Angelina had not patience to listen to any more of this speech; she
interrupted Mr. Evans with a look of indignation, assured him that he
was perfectly unintelligible to her, and walked out of the room with
great dignity. Her dignity made no impression upon the farmer or his
wife, who now repented having offered her a night's lodging in their
house: in the morning they were as eager to get rid of her as she was
impatient to depart. Mr. Evans insisted upon seeing her safe home,
evidently for the purpose of discovering precisely where she lived.
Angelina saw that she could no longer remain undisturbed in her retreat,
and determined to set out immediately in quest of her unknown friend
at Bristol.--Betty Williams, who had a strong desire to have a jaunt to
Bristol, a town which she had never seen but once in her life, offered
to attend Miss Warwick, assuring her that she perfectly well knew the
house where Miss Hodges always lodged. Her offer was accepted; and what
adventures our heroine met with in Bristol, and what difficulties she
encountered before she discovered her Araminta, will be seen in the next
chapter.



CHAPTER III.

Angelina went by water from Cardiffe to Bristol; the water was rather
rough, and, as she was unused to the motion of a vessel, she was both
frightened and sick. She spent some hours very disagreeably, and without
even the sense of acting like a heroine, to support her spirits. It was
late in the evening before she arrived at the end of her voyage: she was
landed on the quay at Bristol. No hackney-coach was to be had, and
she was obliged to walk to the Bush. To find herself in the midst of a
bustling, vulgar crowd, by whom she was unknown, but not unnoticed, was
new to Miss Warwick. Whilst she was with Lady Diana Chillingworth,
she had always been used to see crowds make way for her; she was now
surprised to feel herself jostled in the streets by passengers, who were
all full of their own affairs, hurrying different ways, in pursuit of
objects which probably seemed to them as important as the search for an
unknown friend appeared to Angelina.

Betty Williams's friend's friend, the careful lad, who was to deliver
the letter to Miss Hodges, was a waiter at the Bush. Upon inquiry, it
was found that he had totally forgotten his promise: Angelina's letter
was, after much search, found in a bottle-drainer, so much stained
with port wine, that it was illegible. The man answered with the
most provoking nonchalance, when Angelina reproached him for his
carelessness--"That, indeed, no such person as Miss Hodges was to be
found: that nobody he could meet with had ever heard the name." They
who are extremely enthusiastic suffer continually from the total
indifference of others to their feelings; and young people can scarcely
conceive the extent of this indifference until they have seen something
of the world. Seeing the world does not _always_ mean seeing a certain
set of company in London.

Angelina, the morning after her arrival at the Bush, took a
hackney-coach, and left the care of directing the coachman to Betty
Williams, who professed to have a perfect knowledge of Bristol. Betty
desired the man to drive to the drawbridge; and, at the sound of the
word drawbridge, various associations of ideas with the drawbridges
of ancient times were called up in Miss Warwick's imagination. How
different was the reality from her castles in the air! She was roused
from her reverie by the voices of Betty Williams and the coachman.

"Where _will_ I drive ye to, I ask you?" said the coachman, who was
an Irishman: "_Will_ I stand all day upon the drawbridge stopping the
passage?"

"Trive on a step, and I will get out and see apout me," said Betty: "I
know the look of the house, as well as I know any thing."

Betty got out of the coach, and walked up and down the street, looking
at the houses like one bewildered.

"Bad luck to you! for a Welsh woman as you are," exclaimed the coachman,
jumping down from the box, "will I lave the young lady standing in
the streets all day alone for you to be making a fool this way of us
both?--Sorrow take me now! If I do--"

"Pless us, pe not in a pet or a pucker, or how shall I recollect any
body or any thing.--Cood! Cood!--Stand you there while I just say over
my alphabet: a, p, c, t, e, f, g, h, i, k, l, m, n, o, b.--It was some
name which begins with _p_, and ends with a _t_, I pelieve."

"Here's a pretty direction, upon my troth; some name which begins with a
_p_, and ends with a _t_," cried the coachman; and after he had uttered
half a score of Hibernian execrations upon the Welsh woman's folly,
he with much good nature went along with her to read the names on the
street doors.--"Here's a name now that's the very thing for you--here's
Pushit now.--Was the name Pushit?--Ricollict yourself, my good girl, was
that your name?"

"Pushit!--Oh, yes, I am sure, and pelieve it was Pushit--Mrs. Pushit's
house, Pristol, where our Miss Hodges lodges alway."

"Mrs. Pushit--but this is quite another man; I tell you this is Sir
John--Faith now we are in luck," continued the coachman--"here's another
p just at hand; here's Mrs. Puffit; sure she begins with a p, and ends
with a t, and is a milliner into the bargain? so sure enough I'll engage
the young lady lodges here.--Puffit--Hey?--Ricollict now, and don't be
looking as if you'd just been pulled out of your sleep, and had never
been in a Christian town before now."

"Pless us, Cot pless us!" said the Welsh girl, who was quite overpowered
by the Irishman's flow of words--and she was on the point of having
recourse, in her own defence, to her native tongue, in which she could
have matched either male or female in fluency; but, to Angelina's great
relief, the dialogue between the coachman and Betty Williams ceased. The
coachman drew up to Mrs. Puffit's; but, as there was a handsome carriage
at the door, Miss Warwick was obliged to wait in her hackney-coach
some time longer. The handsome carriage belonged to Lady Frances
Somerset.--By one of those extraordinary coincidences which sometimes
occur in real life, but which are scarcely believed to be natural when
they are related in books, Miss Warwick happened to come to this shop
at the very moment when the persons she most wished to avoid were there.
Whilst the dialogue between Betty Williams and the hackney-coachman was
passing, Lady Diana Chillingworth and Miss Burrage were seated in
Mrs. Puffit's shop: Lady Diana was extremely busy bargaining with the
milliner; for, though rich, and a woman of quality, her ladyship piqued
herself upon making the cheapest bargains in the world.

"Your la'ship did not look at this eight and twenty shilling lace," said
Mrs. Puffit; "'tis positively the cheapest thing your la'ship ever
saw. Jessie! the laces in the little blue band-box. Quick! for my Ladi
Di.--Quick!"

"But it is out of my power to stay to look at any thing more now," said
Lady Diana; "and yet," whispered she to Miss Burrage, "when one does go
out a shopping, one certainly likes to bring home a bargain."

"Certainly; but Bristol's not the place for bargains," said Miss
Burrage; "you will find nothing tolerable, I assure you, my dear Lady
Di., at Bristol."

"Why, my dear," said her ladyship, "were you ever at Bristol before? How
comes it that I never heard that you were at Bristol before? Where were
you, child?"

"At the Wells, at the Wells, ma'am," replied Miss Burrage, and she
turned pale and red in the space of a few seconds; but Lady Diana,
who was very near-sighted, was holding her head so close to the blue
band-box full of lace, that she could not see the changes in her
companion's countenance. The fact was, that Miss Burrage was born and
bred in Bristol, where she had several relations, who were not in high
life, and by whom she consequently dreaded to be claimed. When she first
met Lady Diana Chillingworth at Buxton, she had passed herself upon
her for one of the Burrages of Dorsetshire, and she knew that, if her
ladyship was to discover the truth, she would cast her off with horror.
For this reason, she had done every thing in her power to prevent Lady
Di. from coming to Clifton; and for this reason she now endeavoured to
persuade her that nothing tolerable could be met with at Bristol.

"I am afraid, Lady Di., you will be late at Lady Mary's," said she.

"Look at this lace, child, and give me your opinion--eight and twenty
shillings, Mrs. Puffit, did you say?"

"Eight and twenty, my lady--and I lose by every yard I sell at that
price. Ma'am, you see," said Mrs. Puffit, appealing to Miss Burrage,
"'tis real Valenciennes, you see."

"I see 'tis horrid dear," said Miss Burrage: then in a whisper to Lady
Di. she added, "at Miss Trentham's at the Wells, your ladyship will meet
with such bargains!"

Mrs. Puffit put her lace upon the alabaster neck of the large doll which
stood in the middle of her shop. "Only look, my lady--only see, ma'am,
how beautiful becoming 'tis to the neck, and sets off a dress too, you
know, ma'am. And (turning to Miss Burrage) eight and twenty, you know,
ma'am, is really nothing for any lace you'd wear; but more particularly
for real Valenciennes, which can scarce be had _real_, for love or
money, since the French Revolution. Real Valenciennes!--and will wear
and wash, and wash and wear--not that your ladyship minds that--for
ever and ever,--and is such a bargain, and so becoming to the neck,
especially to ladies of your la'ship's complexion."

"Well, I protest, I believe, Burrage, I don't know what to say, my
dear--hey?"

"I'm told," whispered Miss Burrage, "that Miss Trentham's to have a lace
raffle at the Wells next week."

"A raffle?" cried Lady Di., turning her back immediately upon the doll
and the lace.

"Well," cried Mrs. Puffit, "instead of eight say seven and twenty
shillings, Miss Burrage, for old acquaintance sake."

"Old acquaintance!" exclaimed Miss Burrage: "la! Mrs. Puffit, I don't
remember ever being twice in your shop all the time I was at the Wells
before."

"No, ma'am," replied Mrs. Puffit, with a malicious smile--"but when you
_was_ living on Saint Augustin's Back."

"Saint Augustin's Back, my dear!" exclaimed Lady Diana Chillingworth,
with a look of horror and amazement.

Miss Burrage, laying down a bank-note on the counter, made a quick and
expressive sign to the milliner to hold her tongue.

"Dear Mrs. Puffit," cried she, "you certainly mistake me for some other
strange person. Lady Di., now I look at it with my glass, this lace _is_
very fine, I must agree with you, and not dear, by any means, for real
Valenciennes: cut me off three yards of this lace--I protest there's no
withstanding it, Lady Di."

"Three yards at eight and twenty--here, Jesse," said Mrs. Puffit. "I beg
your pardon, ma'am, for my mistake; I supposed it was some other lady
of the same name; there are so many Burrages. _Only_ three yards did you
say, ma'am?"

"Nay, I don't care if you give me four. I'm of the Burrages of
Dorsetshire."

"A very good family, those Burrages of Dorsetshire, as any in England,"
said Lady Di.--"and put up twelve yards of this for me, Mrs. Puffit."

"Twelve at eight and twenty--yes, my lady--very much obliged to your
ladyship--much obliged to you, Miss Burrage. Here, Jesse, this to my
Lady Di. Chillingworth's carriage." Jesse called at the shop-door, in a
shrill voice, to a black servant of Lady Frances Somerset--"Mr. Hector,
Mr. Hector! Sir, pray put this parcel into the carriage for Lady Diana
Chillingworth."

Angelina, who was waiting in her hackney-coach, started; she could
scarcely believe that she heard the name rightly:--but, an instant
afterwards, the voice of Lady Diana struck her ear, and she sunk back
in great agitation. However, neither Miss Burrage nor Lady Di. saw her;
they got into their carriage, and drove away.

Angelina was so much alarmed, that she could scarcely believe that the
danger was past when she saw the carriage at the furthest end of the
street.

"Wouldn't you be pleased to 'light, ma'am?" said Jesse.

"We don't bring things to the door."

"Who have we here?" cried Mrs. Puffit; "who have we here?"

"Only some folks out of a hack, that was kept waiting, and couldn't draw
up whilst my Lady Di.'s carriage was at the door," said Jesse.

"A good pretty girl, the foremost," said Mrs. Puffit. "But, in the name
of wonder, what's that odd fish coming behind her?"

"A queer-looking pair, in good truth!" said Jesse.

Angelina seated herself, and gave a deep sigh. "Ribands, if you please,
ma'am," said she to Mrs. Puffit. "I must," thought she, "ask for
something before I ask for my Araminta."

"Ribands--yes, ma'am--what sort? Keep an eye upon the glass," whispered
the milliner to her shop girl, as she stooped behind the counter for a
drawer of ribands--"keep an eye on the glass, Jesse--a girl of the town,
I take it. What colour, ma'am?"

"Blue--'cerulean blue.' Here, child," said Angelina, turning to Betty
Williams, "here's a riband for you."

Betty Williams did not hear, for Betty was fascinated by the eyes of the
great doll, opposite to which she stood fixed.

"Lord, what a fine lady! and how hur stares at Betty Williams!" thought
she: "I wish hur would take her eyes off me."

"Betty! Betty Williams!--a riband for you," cried Angelina, in a louder
tone.

Betty started--"Miss!--a riband!" She ran forward, and, in pushing by
the doll, threw it backward: Mrs. Puffit caught it in her arms, and
Betty, stopping short, curtsied, and said to the doll--"Peg pardon,
miss--peg pardon, miss--tit I hurt you?--peg pardon. Pless us! 'tis a
toll, and no woman, I teclare."

The milliner and Jesse now burst into uncontrollable, and, as Angelina
feared, "unextinguishable laughter." Nothing is so distressing to a
sentimental heroine as ridicule: Miss Warwick perceived that she had her
share of that which Betty Williams excited; and she who imagined herself
to be capable of "combating, in all its Proteus forms, the system of
social slavery," was unable to withstand the laughter of a milliner and
her 'prentice.

"Do you please to want any thing else, ma'am?" said Mrs. Puffit, in a
saucy tone--"Rouge, perhaps?"

"I wish to know, madam," said Angelina, "whether a lady of the name of
Hodges does not lodge here?"

"A lady of the name of Hodges!--no, ma'am--I'm very particular
about lodgers--no such lady ever lodged with me.--Jesse! to the
door--quick!--Lady Mary Tasselton's carriage."

Angelina hastily rose and departed. Whilst Jesse ran to the door, and
whilst Mrs. Puffit's attention was fixed upon Lady Mary Tasselton's
carriage, Betty Williams twitched from off the doll's shoulders the
remainder of the piece of Valenciennes lace which had been left there.
"Since hur's only wood, I'll make free," said she to herself, and she
carried off the lace unobserved.

Angelina's impatience to find her Araminta was increased, by the dread
of meeting Lady Di. Chillingworth in every carriage that passed, and in
every shop where she might call. At the next house at which the coachman
stopped, the words, _Dinah Plait, relict of Jonas Plait, cheesemonger_,
were written in large letters over the shop-door. Angelina thought she
was in no danger of meeting her ladyship here, and she alighted. There
was no one in the shop but a child of seven years old; he could not
understand well what Angelina or Betty said, but he ran to call his
aunt. Dinah Plait was at dinner; and when the child opened the door of
the parlour, there came forth such a savoury smell, that Betty Williams,
who was extremely hungry, could not forbear putting her head in, to see
what was upon the table.

"Pless hur! heggs and pacon and toasted cheese--Cot pless hur!"
exclaimed Betty.

"Aunt Dinah," said the child, "here are two women in some great
distress, they told me--and astray and hungry."

"In some great distress, and astray and hungry?--then let them in here,
child, this minute."

There was seated at a small table, in a perfectly neat parlour, a
quaker, whose benevolent countenance charmed Angelina the moment she
entered the room.

"Pardon this intrusion," said she.

"Friend, thou art welcome," said Dinah Plait, and her looks said so
more expressively than her words. An elderly man rose, and leaving the
cork-screw in the half-drawn cork of a bottle of cider, he set a chair
for Angelina, and withdrew to the window.

"Be seated, and eat, for verily thou seemest to be hungry," said Mrs.
Plait to Betty Williams, who instantly obeyed, and began to eat like one
that had been half famished.

"And now, friend, thy business, thy distress--what is it?" said Dinah,
turning to Angelina: "so young to have sorrows."

"I had best take myself away," said the elderly gentleman, who stood at
the window--"I had best take myself away, for miss may not like to speak
before me--though she might, for that matter."

"Where is the gentleman going?" said Miss Warwick; "I have but one short
question to ask, and I have nothing to say that need--"

"I dare say, young lady, you can have nothing to say that you need be
ashamed of, only people in distress don't like so well to speak before
third folks, I _guess_--though, to say the truth, I have never known, by
my own experience, what it was to be in much distress since I came into
the world--but I hope I am not the more hard-hearted for that--for I can
guess, I say, pretty well, how those in distress feel when they come
to speak. Do as you would be done by is my maxim till I can find a
better--so I take myself away, leaving my better part behind me, if it
will be of any service to you, madam."

As he passed by Miss Warwick, he dropped his purse into her lap, and he
was gone before she could recover from her surprise.

"Sir!--madam!" cried she, rising hastily, "here has been some strange
mistake--I am not a beggar--I am much, very much obliged to you, but--"

"Nay, keep it, friend, keep it," said Dinah Plait, pressing the purse
upon Angelina; "John Barker is as rich as a Jew, and as generous as
a prince. Keep it, friend, and you'll oblige both him and me--'tis
dangerous in this world for one so young and so pretty as you are to be
in _great distress_; so be not proud."

"I am not proud," said Miss Warwick, drawing her purse from her pocket;
"but my distress is not of a pecuniary nature--Convince yourself--I am
in distress only for a friend, _an unknown_ friend."

"Touched in her brain, I doubt," thought Dinah.

"Coot ale!" exclaimed Betty Williams--"Coot heggs and pacon."

"Does a lady of the name of Araminta--Miss Hodges, I mean--lodge here?"
said Miss Warwick.

"Friend, I do not let lodgings; and I know of no such person as Miss
Hodges."

"Well, I swear hur name, the coachman told me, did begin with a p, and
end with a t," cried Betty Williams, "or I would never have let him
knock at hur toor."

"Oh, my Araminta! my Araminta!" exclaimed Angelina, turning up her
eyes towards heaven--"when, oh when shall I find thee? I am the most
unfortunate person upon earth."

"Had not hur petter eat a hegg, and a pit of pacon? here's one pit
left," said Betty: "hur must be hungry, for 'tis two o'clock past, and
we preakfasted at nine--hur must be hungry;" and Betty pressed her
_to try the pacon_; but Angelina put it away, or, in the proper style,
motioned the bacon from her.

"I am in no want of food," cried she, rising: "happy they who have no
conception of any but corporeal sufferings. Farewell, madam!--may the
sensibility, of which your countenance is so strongly expressive, never
be a source of misery to you!"--and with that depth of sigh which suited
the close of such a speech, Angelina withdrew.

"If I could but have felt her pulse," said Dinah Plait to herself, "I
could have prescribed something that, maybe, would have done her good,
poor distracted thing! Now it was well done of John Barker to leave this
purse for her--but how is this?--poor thing! she's not fit to be trusted
with money--here she has left her own purse full of guineas."

Dinah ran immediately to the house-door, in hopes of being able to catch
Angelina; but the coach had turned down into another street, and was out
of sight. Mrs. Plait sent for her constant counsellor, John Barker, to
deliberate on the means of returning the purse. It should be mentioned,
to the credit of Dinah's benevolence, that, at the moment when she was
interrupted by the entrance of Betty Williams and Angelina, she
was hearing the most flattering things from a person who was not
disagreeable to her: her friend, John Barker, was a rich hosier, who
had retired from business; and who, without any ostentation, had a great
deal of real feeling and generosity. But the fastidious taste of _fine_,
or sentimental readers, will probably be disgusted by our talking of
the feelings and generosity of a hosier and a cheesemonger's widow.
It belongs to a certain class of people to indulge in the luxury of
sentiment: we shall follow our heroine, therefore, who, both from
her birth and education, is properly qualified to have--"exquisite
feelings."

The next house at which Angelina stopped, to search for her amiable
Araminta, was at Mrs. Porett's academy for young ladies.

"Yes, ma'am, Miss Hodges is here--Pray walk into this room, and you
shall see the young lady immediately." Angelina burst into the room
instantly, exclaiming--

"Oh, my Araminta! have I found you at last?"

She stopped short, a little confounded at finding herself in a large
room full of young ladies, who were dancing reels, and who all stood
still at one and the same instant, and fixed their eyes upon her, struck
with astonishment at her theatrical entrée and exclamation.

"Miss Hodges!" said Mrs. Porett--and a little girl of seven years old
came forward:--"Here, ma'am," said Mrs. Porett to Angelina, "here is
Miss Hodges."

"Not _my_ Miss Hodges! not my Araminta! alas!"

"No, ma'am," said the little girl; "I am only Letty Hodges."

Several of her companions now began to titter.

"These girls," said Angelina to herself, "take me for a fool;" and,
turning to Mrs. Porett, she apologized for the trouble she had given, in
language as little romantic as she could condescend to use.

"Tid you bid me, miss, wait in the coach, or the passage?" cried Betty
Williams, forcing her way in at the door, so as almost to push down the
dancing-master, who stood with his back to it. Betty stared round,
and dropped curtsy after curtsy, whilst the young ladies laughed
and whispered, and whispered and laughed; and the words,
odd--vulgar--strange--who is she?--what is she?--reached Miss Warwick.

"This Welsh girl," thought she, "is my torment. Wherever I go she makes
me share the ridicule of her folly."

Clara Hope, one of the young ladies, saw and pitied Angelina's
confusion.

"Gif over, an ye have any gude nature--gif over your whispering and
laughing," said Clara to her companions: "ken ye not ye make her so
bashful, she'd fain hide her face wi' her twa hands."

But it was in vain that the good-natured Clara Hope remonstrated: her
companions could not forbear tittering, as Betty Williams, upon Miss
Warwick's laying the blame of the mistake on her, replied in a strong
Welsh accent--"I will swear almost the name was Porett or Plait, where
our Miss Hodges tid always lodge in Pristol. Porett, or Plait, or
Puffit, or some of her names that pekin with a p and ent with at."

Angelina, quite _overpowered_, shrunk back, as Betty bawled out her
vindication, and she was yet more confused, when Monsieur Richelet, the
dancing-master, at this unlucky instant, came up to her, and with
an elegant bow, said, "It is not difficult to see by her air, that
mademoiselle dances superiorly. Mademoiselle vould she do me de
plaisir--de honneur to dance one minuet?"

"Oh, if she would but dance!" whispered some of the group of young
ladies.

"Excuse me, sir," said Miss Warwick.

"Not a minuet?--den a minuet de la cour, a cotillon, or contredanse, or
reel; vatever mademoiselle please vill do us honneur."

Angelina, with a mixture of impatience and confusion, repeated, "Excuse
me, sir--I am going--I interrupt--I beg I may not interrupt."

"A coot morrow to you all, creat and small," said Betty Williams,
curtsying awkwardly at the door as she went out before Miss Warwick.

The young ladies were now diverted so much beyond the bounds of decorum,
that Mrs. Porett was obliged to call them to order.

"Oh, my Araminta, what scenes have I gone through! to what derision have
I exposed myself for your sake!" said our heroine to herself.

Just as she was leaving the dancing-room, she was stopped short by Betty
Williams, who, with a face of terror, exclaimed, "'Tis a poy in the
hall, that I tare not pass for my lifes; he has a pasket full of pees
in his hand, and I cannot apide pees, ever since one tay when I was a
chilt, and was stung on the nose by a pee. The poy in the hall has a
pasketful of pees, ma'am," said Betty, with an imploring accent, to Mrs.
Porett.

"A basketful of bees!" said Mrs. Porett, laughing: "Oh, you are
mistaken: I know what the boy has in his basket--they are only flowers;
they are not bees: you may safely go by them."

"Put I saw pees with my own eyes," persisted Betty.

"Only a basketful of the bee orchis, which I commissioned a little boy
to bring from St. Vincent's rocks for my young botanists," said Mrs.
Porett to Angelina: "you know the flower is so like a bee, that at
first sight you might easily mistake it." Mrs. Porett, to convince Betty
Williams that she had no cause for fear, went on before her into the
hall; but Betty still hung back, crying--

"It is a pasket full of pees! I saw the pees with my own eyes."

The noise she made excited the curiosity of the young ladies in the
dancing-room: they looked out to see what was the matter.

"Oh, 'tis the wee-wee French prisoner boy, with the bee orchises for
us--there, I see him standing in the hall," cried Clara Hope, and
instantly she ran, followed by several of her companions, into the hall.

"You see that they are not bees," said Mrs. Porett to Betty Williams, as
she took several of the flowers in her hand. Betty, half convinced, yet
half afraid, moved a few steps into the hall.

"You have no cause for dread," said Clara Hope; "poor boy, he has nought
in his basket that can hurt any body."

Betty Williams's heavy foot was now set upon the train of Clara's gown,
and, as the young lady sprang forwards, her gown, which was of thin
muslin, was torn so as to excite the commiseration of all her young
companions.

"What a terrible rent! and her best gown!" said they. "Poor Clara Hope!"

"Pless us! peg pardon, miss!" cried the awkward, terrified Betty; "peg
pardon, miss!"

"Pardon's granted," said Clara; and whilst her companions stretched out
her train, deploring the length and breadth of her misfortune, she went
on speaking to the little French boy. "Poor wee boy! 'tis a sad thing
to be in a strange country, far away from one's ane ane kin and happy
hame--poor wee thing," said she, slipping some money into his hand.

"What a heavenly countenance!" thought Angelina, as she looked at Clara
Hope: "Oh, that my Araminta may resemble her!"

"Plait il--take vat you vant--tank you," said the little boy, offering
to Clara Hope his basket of flowers, and a small box of trinkets, which
he held in his hand.

"Here's a many pretty toys--who'll buy?" cried Clara, turning to her
companions.

The young ladies crowded round the box and the basket.

"Is he in distress?" said Angelina; "perhaps I can be of some use to
him!" and she put her hand into her pocket, to feel for her purse.

"He's a very honest, industrious little boy," said Mrs. Porett, "and he
supports his parents by his active ingenuity."

"And, Louis, is your father sick still?" continued Clara Hope to the
poor boy.

"Bien malade! bien malade! very sick! very sick!" said he. The
unaffected language of real feeling and benevolence is easily
understood, and is never ridiculous; even in the broken English
of little Louis, and the broad Scotch tone of Clara, it was both
intelligible and agreeable.

Angelina had been for some time past feeling in her pocket for her
purse.

"'Tis gone--certainly gone!" she exclaimed: "I've lost it! lost
my purse! Betty, do you know any thing of it? I had it at Mrs.
Plait's!--What shall I do for this poor little fellow?--This trinket
is of gold!" said she, taking from her neck a locket--"Here, my little
fellow, I have no money to give you, take this--nay, you must, indeed."

"Tanks! tanks! bread for my poor fader! joy! joy!--too much joy! too
much!"

"You see you were wrong to laugh at her," whispered Clara Hope to her
companions: "I liked her lukes from the first."

Natural feeling, at this moment, so entirely occupied and satisfied
Angelina, that she forgot her sensibility for her unknown friend; and it
was not till one of the children observed the lock of hair in her locket
that she recollected her accustomed cant of--"_Oh, my Araminta! my
amiable Araminta!_ could I part with that hair, more precious than
gold?"

"Pless us!" said Betty; "put, if she has lost her purse, who shall pay
for the coach, and what will become of our tinners?"

Angelina silenced Betty Williams with peremptory dignity.

Mrs. Porett, who was a good and sensible woman, and who had been
interested for our heroine, by her good-nature to the little French boy,
followed Miss Warwick as she left the room. "Let me detain you but for
a few minutes," said she, opening the door of a little study. "You have
nothing to fear from any impertinent curiosity on my part; but, perhaps,
I may be of some assistance to you."--Miss Warwick could not refuse to
be detained a few minutes by so friendly a voice.

"Madam, you have mentioned the name of Araminta several times since you
came into this house," said Mrs. Porett, with something of embarrassment
in her manner, for she was afraid of appearing impertinent. "I know, or
at least I knew, a lady who writes under that name, and whose real name
is Hodges."

"Oh, a thousand, thousand thanks!" cried Angelina: "tell me, where can I
find her?"

"Are you acquainted with her? You seem to be a stranger, young lady, in
Bristol. Are you acquainted with Miss Hodges's _whole_ history?"

"Yes, her _whole_ history; every feeling of her soul; every thought of
her mind!" cried Angelina, with enthusiasm. "We have corresponded for
two years past."

Mrs. Porett smiled. "It is not always possible," said she, "to judge of
ladies by their letters. I am not inclined to believe _above half_
what the world says, according to Lord Chesterfield's allowance for
scandalous stories; but it may be necessary to warn you, as you seem
very young, that--"

"Madam," cried Angelina, "young as I am, I know that superior genius and
virtue are the inevitable objects of scandal. It is in vain to detain me
further."

"I am truly sorry for it," said Mrs. Porett; "but, perhaps, you will
allow me to tell you, that--"

"No, not a word; not a word more will I hear," cried our heroine; and
she hurried out of the house, and threw herself into the coach. Mrs.
Porett contrived, however, to make Betty Williams hear, that the most
probable means of gaining any intelligence of Miss Hodges, would be to
inquire for her at the shop of Mr. Beatson, who was her printer. To Mr.
Beatson's they drove--though Betty professed that she was half unwilling
to inquire for Miss Hodges from any one whose name did not begin with a
p, and end with a t.

"What a pity it is," said Mrs. Porett, when she returned to her
pupils--"what a pity it is that this young lady's friends should permit
her to go about in a hackney-coach, with such a strange, vulgar servant
girl as that! She is too young to know how quickly, and often how
severely, the world judges by appearances. Miss Hope, now we talk of
appearances, you forget that your gown is torn, and you do not know,
perhaps, that your friend, Lady Frances Somerset--"

"Lady Frances Somerset!" cried Clara Hope--"I love to hear her very
name."

"For which reason you interrupt me the moment I mention it--I have a
great mind not to tell you--that Lady Frances Somerset has invited you
to go to the play with her to-night:--'The Merchant of Venice, and the
Adopted Child.'"

"Gude-natured Lady Frances Somerset, I'm sure an' if Clara Hope had been
your adopted child twenty times over, you could not have been more kind
to her _nor_ you have been.--No, not had she been your are countrywoman,
and of your are clan--and all for the same reasons that make some
neglect and look down upon her--because Clara is not meikle rich, and
is far away from her ane ane friends.--Gude Lady Frances Somerset! Clara
Hope luves you in her heart, and she's as blythe wi' the thought o'
ganging to see you as if she were going to dear Inverary."

It is a pity, for the sake of our story, that Miss Warwick did not stay
a few minutes longer at Mrs. Porett's, that she might have heard this
eulogium on Lady Frances Somerset, and might have, a second time in
one day, discovered that she was on the very brink of meeting with the
persons she most dreaded to see; but, however temptingly romantic such
an incident would have been, we must, according to our duty as faithful
historians, deliver a plain unvarnished tale.

Miss Warwick arrived at Mr. Beatson's, and as soon as she had pronounced
the name of Hodges, the printer called to his devil for a parcel of
advertisements, which he put into her hand; they were proposals for
printing by subscription a new novel--"The Sorrows of Araminta."

"Oh, my Araminta! my amiable Araminta! have I found you at last?--_The
Sorrows of Araminta, a novel, in nine volumes_--Oh, charming!--_together
with a tragedy on the same plan_--Delightful!--_Subscriptions
received at Joseph Beatson's, printer and bookseller; and by Rachael
Hodges_--Odious name!--_at Mrs. Bertrand's_."

"_Bartrand!_--There now _you_, do ye hear that? the lady lives at Mrs.
Bartrand's: how will you make out now that Bartrand begins with a p,
and ends with a t, now?" said the hackney-coachman to Betty, who was
standing at the door.

"Pertrant! why," cried Betty, "what would you have?"

"Silence! O silence!" said Miss Warwick; and she continued
reading--"_Subscriptions received at Mrs. Bertrand's_."

"Pertrant, you hear, plockhead, you Irishman!" cried Betty Williams.

"Bartrand--you have no ears, Welshwoman as you are!" retorted Terence
O'Grady.

"Subscription two guineas, for the Sorrows of Araminta," continued
our heroine; but, looking up, she saw Betty Williams and the
hackney-coachman making menacing faces and gestures at one another.

"Fight it out in the passage, for Heaven's sake!" said Angelina; "if you
must fight, fight out of my sight."

"For shame, before the young lady!" said Mr. Beatson, holding the
hackney-coachman: "have done disputing so loud."

"I've done, but she is wrong," cried Terence.

"I've done, put he is wrong," said Betty.

Terence was so much provoked by the Welshwoman, that he declared he
would not carry her a step further in his coach--that his _beasts_ were
tired, and that he must be paid his fare, for that he neither could nor
would wait any longer. Betty Williams was desired by Angelina to pay
him. She hesitated; but after being assured by Miss Warwick that the
debt should be punctually discharged in a few hours, she acknowledged
that she had silver enough "in a little box at the bottom of her
pocket;" and, after much fumbling, she pulled out a snuff-box, which,
she said, had been given to her by her "creat crandmother."--Whilst she
was paying the coachman, the printer's devil observed one end of a piece
of lace hanging out of her pocket; she had, by accident, pulled it out
along with the snuff-box.

"And was this your great grandmother's too?" said the printer's devil,
taking hold of the lace.

Betty started. Angelina was busy, making inquiries from the printer, and
she did not see or hear what was passing close to her: the coachman
was intent upon the examination of his shillings. Betty, with great
assurance, reproved the printer's devil for touching such lace with his
plack fingers.

"'Twas not my Grandmother's--'tis the young lady's," said she: "let
it pe, pray--look how you have placked it, and marked it, with plack
fingers."

She put the stolen lace hastily into her pocket, and immediately went
out, as Miss Warwick desired, to call another coach.

Before we follow our heroine to Mrs. Bertrand's, we must beg leave to
go, and, if we can, to transport our readers with us, to Lady Frances
Somerset's house, at Clifton.



CHAPTER IV.

"Well, how I am to get up this hill again, Heaven knows!" said Lady
Diana Chillingworth, who had been prevailed upon to walk down Clifton
Hill to the Wells. "Heigho! that sister of mine, Lady Frances, walks,
and talks, and laughs, and admires the beauties of nature till I'm half
dead."

"Why, indeed, Lady Frances Somerset, I must allow," said Miss Burrage,
"is not the fittest companion in the world for a person of your
ladyship's nerves; but then it is to be hoped that the glass of water
which you have just taken fresh at the pump will be of service, provided
the racketing to Bristol to the play don't counteract it, and undo all
again."

"How I dread going into that Bristol playhouse!" said Miss Burrage to
herself--"some of my precious relations may be there to claim me. My
aunt Dinah--God bless her for a starched quaker--wouldn't be seen at a
play, I'm sure--so she's safe;--but the odious sugar-baker's daughters
might be there, dizened out; and between the acts, their great tall
figures might rise in judgment against me--spy me out--stare and
curtsy--pop--pop--pop at me without mercy, or bawl out across the
benches, 'Cousin Burrage! Cousin Burrage!' And Lady Diana Chillingworth
to hear it!--oh, I should sink into the earth."

"What amusement," continued Miss Burrage, addressing herself to Lady
Di., "what amusement Lady Frances Somerset can find at a Bristol
playhouse, and at this time of the year too, is to me really
unaccountable."

"I do suppose," replied Lady Diana, "that my sister goes only to please
that child--(Clara Hope, I think they call her)--not to please me, I'm
sure;--but what is she doing all this time in the pump-room? does she
know we are waiting for her?--oh, here she comes.--Frances, I am half
dead."

"Half dead, my dear! well, here is something to bring you to life
again," said Lady Frances: "I do believe I have found out Miss Warwick."

"I am sure, my dear, _that_ does not revive me--I've been almost plagued
to death with her already," said Lady Diana.

"There's no living in this world without plagues of some sort or
other--but the pleasure of doing good makes one forget them all: here,
look at this advertisement, my dear," said Lady Frances: "a gentleman,
whom I have just met with in the pump-room, was reading it in the
newspaper when I came in, and a whole knot of scandal-mongers were
settling who it could possibly be. One snug little man, a Welsh curate,
I believe, was certain it was the bar-maid of an inn at Bath, who is
said to have inveigled a young nobleman into matrimony. I left the
Welshman in the midst of a long story, about his father and a young
lady, who lost her shoe on the Welsh mountains, and I ran away with the
paper to bring it to you."

Lady Diana received the paper with an air of reluctance.

"Was not I very fortunate to meet with it?" said Lady Frances.

"I protest I see no good fortune in the business, from beginning to
end."

"Ah, because you are not come to the end yet--look--'tis from Mrs. Hoel,
of the inn at Cardiffe, and by the date, she must have been there last
week."

"Who--Mrs. Hoel?"

"Miss Warwick, my dear--I beg pardon for my pronoun--but do read
this--eyes--hair--complexion--age--size--it certainly must be Miss
Warwick."

"And what then?" said Lady Di, with provoking coldness, walking on
towards home.

"Why, then, my dear, you know we can go to Cardiffe to-morrow morning,
find the poor girl, and, before any body knows any thing of the matter,
before her reputation is hurt, or you blamed, before any harm can
happen, convince the girl of her folly and imprudence, and bring her
back to you and common sense."

"To common sense, and welcome, if you can; but not to me."

"Not to you!--Nay; but, my dear, what will become of her?"

"Nay; but, my dear Frances, what will the world say?"

"Of her?"

"Of me."

"My dear Di., shall I tell you what the world would say?"

"No, Lady Frances, I'll tell _you_ what the world would say--that Lady
Diana Chillingworth's house was an asylum for runaways."

"An asylum for nonsense!--I beg your pardon, sister--but it always
provokes me to see a person afraid to do what they think right, because,
truly, 'the world will say it is wrong.' What signifies the uneasiness
we may suffer from the idle blame or tittle-tattle of the day, compared
with the happiness of a young girl's whole life, which is at stake?"

"Oh, Lady Frances, that is spoken like yourself--I love you in my
heart--that's right! that's right!" thought Clara Hope.

Lady Diana fell back a few paces, that she might consult one whose
advice she always found agreeable to her own opinions.

"In my opinion," whispered Miss Burrage to Lady Diana, "you are right,
quite right, to have nothing more to do with the _happiness_ of a young
lady who has taken such a step."

They were just leaving St. Vincent's parade, when they heard the sound
of music upon the walk by the river side, and they saw a little
boy there, seated at the foot of a tree, playing on the guitar, and
singing--

"J'ai quitté mon pays et mes amis, Pour jouer de la guitare, Qui va
clin, clin, qui va clin, clin, Qui va clin, clin, clin, clin."

"Ha! my wee wee friend," said Clara Hope, "are you here?--I was just
thinking of you, just wishing for you. By gude luck, have you the weeny
locket about you that the young lady gave you this morning?--the weeny
locket, my bonny boy?"

"Plait-il?" said little Louis.

"He _don't_ understand one word," said Miss Burrage, laughing
sarcastically, "he don't understand one word of all your _bonnys_, and
_wee wees_ and _weenies_, Miss Hope; he, unfortunately, don't understand
broad Scotch, and maybe he mayn't be so great a proficient as you are
in _boarding-school_ French; but I'll try if he can understand _me_, if
you'll tell me what you want."

"Such a trinket as this," said Clara, showing a locket which hung from
her neck.

"Ah oui--yes, I comprehend now," cried the boy, taking from his
coat-pocket a small case of trinkets--"la voilà!--here is vat de young
lady did give me--good young lady!" said Louis, and he produced the
locket.

"I declare," exclaimed Miss Burrage, catching hold of it, "'tis Miss
Warwick's locket! I'm sure of it--here's the motto--I've read it, and
laughed at it twenty times--L'Amie Inconnue."

"When I heard you all talking just now about that description of the
young lady in the newspaper, I cude not but fancy," said Clara Hope,
"that the lady whom I saw this morning must be Miss Warwick."

"Saw--where?" cried Lady Frances, eagerly.

"At Bristol--at our academy--at Mrs. Porett's," said Clara; "but mark
me, she is not there now--I do not ken where she may be now."

"Moi je sais!--I do know de demoiselle did stop in a coach at one house;
I was in de street--I can show you de house."

"Can you so, my good little fellow? then let us begone directly," said
Lady Frances.

"You'll excuse me, sister," said Lady Di.

"Excuse you!--_I_ will, but _the world_ will not. You'll be abused,
sister, shockingly abused."

This assertion made more impression upon Lady Di. Chillingworth than
could have been made either by argument or entreaty.

"One really does not know how to act--people take so much notice of
every thing that is said and done by persons of a certain rank: if you
think that I shall be so much abused--I absolutely do not know what to
say."

"But I thought," interposed Miss Burrage, "that Lady Frances was going
to take you to the play to-night, Miss Hope?"

"Oh, never heed the play--never heed the play, or Clara Hope--never heed
taking me to the play: Lady Frances is going to do a better thing.--Come
on, my bonny boy," said she to the little French boy, who was following
them.

We must now return to our heroine, whom we left on her way to Mrs.
Bertrand's. Mrs. Bertrand kept a large confectionary and fruit shop in
Bristol.

"Please to walk through this way, ma'am--Miss Hodges is above
stairs--she shall be apprized directly--Jenny! run up stairs," said
Mrs. Bertrand to her maid--"run up stairs, and tell Miss Hodges here's
a young lady wants to see her in a great hurry--You'd best sit down,
ma'am," continued Mrs. Bertrand to Angelina, "till the girl has been up
with the message."

"Oh, my Araminta! how my heart beats!" exclaimed Miss Warwick.

"How my mouth waters!" cried Betty Williams, looking round at the fruit
and confectionaries.

"Would you, ma'am, be pleased," said Mrs. Bertrand, "to take a glass
of ice this warm evening? cream-ice, or water-ice, ma'am? pine-apple or
strawberry ice?" As she spoke, Mrs. Bertrand held a salver, covered with
ices, toward Miss Warwick: but, apparently, she thought that it was
not consistent with the delicacy of friendship to think of eating or
drinking when she was thus upon the eve of her first interview with
her Araminta. Betty Williams, who was of a different _nature_ from our
heroine, saw the salver recede with excessive surprise and regret; she
stretched out her hand after it, and seized a glass of raspberry-ice;
but no sooner had she tasted it than she made a frightful face, and let
the glass fall, exclaiming--

"Pless us! 'tis not as good as cooseherry fool."

Mrs. Bertrand next offered her a cheesecake, which Betty ate
voraciously.

"She's actually a female Sancho Panza!" thought Angelina: her own
more striking resemblance to the female Quixote never occurred to our
heroine--so blind are we to our own failings.

"Who is the young lady?" whispered the mistress of the fruit shop
to Betty Williams, whilst Miss Warwick was walking--we should say
_pacing_--up and down the room, in _anxious solicitude, and evident
agitation_.

"Hur's a young lady," replied Betty, stopping to take a mouthful of
cheesecake between every member of her sentence, "a young lady--that
has--lost hur--"

"Her heart--so I thought."

"Hur purse!" said Betty, with an accent, which showed that she thought
this the more serious loss of the two.

"Her purse!--that's bad indeed:--you pay for your own cheesecake and
raspberry-ice, and for the glass that you broke," said Mrs. Bertrand.

"Put hur has a great deal of money in hur trunk, I pelieve, at
Llanwaetur," said Betty.

"Surely Miss Hodges does not know I am here," cried Miss Warwick--"her
Angelina!"

"Ma'am, she'll be down immediately, I do suppose," said Mrs. Bertrand.
"What was it you pleased called for--angelica, ma'am, did you say? At
present we are quite out, I'm ashamed to say, of angelica, ma'am--Well,
child," continued Mrs. Bertrand to her maid, who was at this moment seen
passing by the back door of the shop in great haste.

"Ma'am--anan," said the maid, turning back her cap from off her ear.

"Anan! deaf doll! didn't you hear me tell you to tell Miss Hodges a lady
wanted to speak to her in a great hurry?"

"No, mam," replied the girl, who spoke in the broad Somersetshire
dialect: "I heard you zay, _up to Miss Hodges_; zoo I thought it was the
bottle o'brandy, and zoo I took alung with the tea-kettle--but I'll go
up again now, and zay miss bes in a hurry, az she zays."

"Brandy!" repeated Miss Warwick, on whom the word seemed to make a great
impression.

"Pranty, ay, pranty," repeated Betty Williams--"our Miss Hodges always
takes pranty in her teas at Llanwaetur."

"Brandy!--then she can't be my Araminta."

"Oh, the very same, and no other; you are quite right, ma'am," said
Mrs. Bertrand, "if you mean the same that is publishing the novel,
ma'am,--'The Sorrows of Araminta'--for the reason I know so much
about it is, that I take in the subscriptions, and distributed the
_pur_posals."

Angelina had scarcely time to believe or disbelieve what she heard,
before the maid returned, with "Mam, Mizz Hodges haz hur best love to
you, mizz--and please to walk up--There be two steps; please to have a
care, or you'll break your neck."

Before we introduce Angelina to her "unknown friend," we must relate the
conversation which was actually passing between the amiable Araminta
and her Orlando, whilst Miss Warwick was waiting in the fruit shop. Our
readers will be so good as to picture to themselves a woman, with a face
and figure which seemed to have been intended for a man, with a
voice and gesture capable of setting even man, "imperial man," at
defiance--such was Araminta. She was, at this time, sitting cross-legged
in an arm-chair at a tea-table, on which, beside the tea equipage, was
a medley of things of which no prudent tongue or pen would undertake to
give a correct inventory. At the feet of this fair lady, kneeling on
one knee, was a thin, subdued, simple-looking quaker, of the name of
Nathaniel Gazabo.

"But now, Natty," said Miss Hodges, in a voice more masculine than her
looks, "you understand the conditions--If I give you my hand, and make
you my husband, it is upon condition that you never contradict any of my
opinions: do you promise me that?"

"Yea, verily," replied Nat.

"And you promise to leave me entirely at liberty to act, as well as to
think, in all things as my own independent understanding shall suggest?"

"Yea, verily," was the man's response.

"And you will be guided by me in all things?"

"Yea, verily."

"And you will love and admire me all your life, as much as you do now?"

"Yea, verily."

"Swear," said the unconscionable woman.

"Nay, verily," replied the meekest of men, "I cannot swear, my Rachel,
being a quaker; but I will affirm."

"Swear, swear," cried the lady, in an imperious tone, "or I will never
be your Araminta."

"I swear," said Nat Gazabo, in a timid voice.

"Then, Natty, I consent to be Mrs. Hodges Gazabo. Only remember always
to call me your dear Araminta."

"My dear Araminta! thus," said he, embracing her, "thus let me thank
thee, my dear Araminta!"

It was in the midst of these thanks that the maid interrupted the
well-matched pair, with the news that a young lady was below, who was in
a great hurry to see Miss Hodges.

"Let her come," said Miss Hodges; "I suppose it is only one of the
Miss Carvers--Don't stir, Nat; it will vex her to see you kneeling to
me--don't stir, I say--"

"Where is she? Where is my Araminta?" cried Miss Warwick, as the maid
was trying to open the outer passage-door for her, which had a bad lock.

"Get up, get up, Natty; and get some fresh water in the
tea-kettle--quick!" cried Miss Hodges, and she began to clear away some
of the varieties of literature, &c., which lay scattered about the room.
Nat, in obedience to her commands, was making his exit with all possible
speed, when Angelina entered, exclaiming--

"My amiable Araminta!--My unknown friend!"

"My Angelina!--My charming Angelina!" cried Miss Hodges.

Miss Hodges was not the sort of person our heroine expected to see;--and
to conceal the panic, with which the first sight of her unknown friend
struck her disappointed imagination, she turned back to listen to the
apologies which Nat Gazabo was pouring forth about his awkwardness and
the tea-kettle.

"Turn, Angelina, ever dear!" cried Miss Hodges, with the tone and action
of a bad actress who is rehearsing an embrace--"Turn, Angelina, ever
dear!--thus, thus let us meet, to part no more."

"But her voice is so loud," said Angelina to herself, "and her looks
so vulgar, and there is such a smell of brandy!--How unlike the
elegant delicacy I had expected in my unknown friend!" Miss Warwick
involuntarily shrunk from the stifling embrace.

"You are overpowered, my Angelina--lean on me," said her Araminta.

Nat Gazabo re-entered with the tea-kettle--

"Here's _boiling_ water, and we'll have fresh tea in a trice--the young
lady's over-tired, seemingly--Here's a chair, miss, here's a chair,"
cried Nat. Miss Warwick _sunk_ upon the chair: Miss Hodges seated
herself beside her, continuing to address her in a theatrical tone.

"This moment is bliss unutterable! my kind, my noble-minded Angelina,
thus to leave all your friends for your Araminta!"--Suddenly changing
her voice--"Set the tea-kettle, Nat!"

"Who is this Nat, I wonder?" thought Miss Warwick.

"Well, and tell me," said Miss Hodges, whose attention was awkwardly
divided between the ceremonies of making tea and making speeches--"and
tell me, my Angelina--That's water enough, Nat--and tell me, my
Angelina, how did you find me out?"

"With some difficulty, indeed, _my Araminta_." Miss Warwick could hardly
pronounce the words.

"So kind, so noble-minded," continued Miss Hodges--"and did you receive
my last letter--three sheets?--And how did you contrive--Stoop the
kettle, _do_, Nat."

"Oh, this odious Nat! how I wish she would send him away!" thought Miss
Warwick.

"And tell me, my Araminta--my Angelina I mean--how did you contrive
your elopement--and how did you escape from the eye of your aristocratic
Argus--how did you escape from all your unfeeling persecutors?--Tell me,
tell me all your adventures, my Angelina!--Butter the toast, Nat," said
Miss Hodges who was cutting bread and butter, which she did not do with
the celebrated grace of Charlotte, in the Sorrows of Werter.

"I'll tell you all, my Araminta," whispered Miss Warwick, "when we are
by ourselves."

"Oh, never mind Nat," whispered Miss Hodges.

"Couldn't you tell him," rejoined Miss Warwick, "that he need not wait
any longer?"

"_Wait_, my dear! why, what do you take him for?"

"Why, is not he your footman?" whispered Angelina.

"My footman!--Nat!" exclaimed Miss Hodges, bursting out a laughing, "my
Angelina took you for my footman."

"Good heavens! what is he?" said Angelina, in a low voice.

"Verily," said Nat Gazabo, with a sort of bashful simple laugh, "verily,
I am the humblest of her servants."

"And does my Angelina--spare my delicacy," said Miss Hodges--"does
my Angelina not remember, in any of my long letters, the name
of--Orlando!--There he stands."

"Orlando!--Is this gentleman your Orlando, of whom I have heard so
much?"

"He! he! he!" simpered Nat. "I am Orlando, of whom you have heard so
much; and she--(pointing to Miss Hodges)--she is, to-morrow morning, God
willing, to be Mistress Hodges Gazabo."

"Mrs. Hodges Gazabo, my Araminta!" said Angelina, with astonishment,
which she could not suppress.

"Yes, my Angelina: so end 'The Sorrows of Araminta'--Another cup?--do I
make the tea too sweet?" said Miss Hodges, whilst Nat handed the bread
and butter to the ladies officiously.

"The man looks like a fool," thought Miss Warwick.

"Set down the bread and butter, and be quiet, Nat--Then, as soon as
the wedding is over, we fly, my Angelina, to our charming cottage in
Wales:--there may we bid defiance to the storms of fate--

"'The world forgetting, by the world forgot.'"

"That," said Angelina, "'is the blameless vestal's lot:'--but you forget
that you are to be married, my Araminta; and you forget that, in your
letter of three folio sheets, you said not one word to me of this
intended marriage."

"Nay, my dear, blame me not for a want of confidence, that my heart
disclaims," said Miss Hodges: "from the context of my letters, you must
have suspected the progress my Orlando had made in my affections;
but, indeed, I should not have brought myself to decide apparently so
precipitately, had it not been for the opposition, the persecution of my
friends--I was determined to show them that I know, and can assert, my
right to think and act, upon all occasions, for myself."

Longer, much longer, Miss Hodges, spoke in the most peremptory voice;
but whilst she was declaiming on her favourite topic, her Angelina was
"revolving in her altered mind" the strange things which she had seen
and heard in the course of the last half-hour; every thing appeared to
her in a new light; when she compared the conversation and conduct
of Miss Hodges with the sentimental letters of her Araminta; when
she compared Orlando in description to Orlando in reality, she could
scarcely believe her senses: accustomed as she had been to elegance
of manners, the vulgarity and awkwardness of Miss Hodges shocked and
disgusted her beyond measure. The disorder, and--for the words must be
said--slatternly dirty appearance of her Araminta's dress, and of every
thing in her apartment, were such as would have made a hell of heaven;
and the idea of spending her life in a cottage with Mrs. Hodges Gazabo
and Nat overwhelmed our heroine with the double fear of wretchedness and
ridicule.

"Another cup of tea, my Angelina?" said Miss Hodges, when she had
finished her tirade against her persecutors, that is to say, her
friends, "another cup, my Angelina?--do, after your journey and fatigue,
take another cup."

"No more, I thank you."

"Then reach me that tragedy, Nat--you know--"

"Your own tragedy, is it, my dear?" said he.

"Ah, Nat, now! you never can keep a secret," said Miss Hodges. "I wanted
to have surprised my Angelina."

"I am surprised!" thought Angelina--"oh, how much surprised!"

"I have a motto for our cottage here somewhere," said Miss Hodges,
turning over the leaves of her tragedy--"but I'll keep that till
to-morrow--since to-morrow's the day sacred to love and friendship."

Nat, by way of showing his joy in a becoming manner, rubbed his hands,
and hummed a tune. His mistress frowned, and bit her lips; but the
signals were lost upon him, and he sung out, in an exulting tone--

"When the lads of the village so merrily, ah! Sound their tabours, I'll
hand thee along."

"Fool! Dolt! Idiot!" cried his Araminta, rising furious--"out of my
sight!" Then, sinking down upon the chair, she burst into tears, and
threw herself into the arms of her pale, astonished Angelina. "Oh, my
Angelina!" she exclaimed, "I am the most ill-matched! most unfortunate!
most wretched of women!"

"Don't be _frighted_, miss," said Nat; "she'll come _to_ again
presently--'tis only _her way_." As he spoke, he poured out a bumper of
brandy, and kneeling, presented it to his mistress. "'Tis the only thing
in life does her good," continued he, "in this sort of fits."

"Heavens, what a scene!" said Miss Warwick to herself--"and the woman
so heavy, I can scarce support her weight--and is this _my unknown
friend?_"

How long Miss Hodges would willingly have continued to sob upon Miss
Warwick's shoulder, or how long that shoulder could possibly have
sustained her weight, is a mixed problem in physics and metaphysics,
which must for ever remain unsolved: but suddenly a loud scream was
heard. Miss Hodges started up--the door was thrown open, and Betty
Williams rushed in, crying loudly--"Oh, shave me! shave me! for the
love of Cot, shave me, miss!" and, pushing by the swain, who held the
unfinished glass of brandy in his hand, she threw herself on her knees
at the feet of Angelina.

"Gracious me!" exclaimed Nat, "whatever you are, you need not push one
so."

"What now, Betty Williams? is the wench mad or drunk?" cried Miss
Hodges.

"We are to have a mad scene next, I suppose," said Miss Warwick,
calmly--"I am prepared for every thing, after what I have seen."

Betty Williams continued crying bitterly, and wringing her hands--"Oh,
shave me this once, miss! 'tis the first thing of the kind I ever tid,
inteet, inteet! Oh, shave me this once--I tid not know it was worth so
much as a shilling, and that I could be hanged, inteet--and I--"

Here Betty was interrupted by the entrance of Mrs. Puffit, the milliner,
the printer's devil, and a stern-looking man, to whom Mrs. Puffit, as
she came in, said, pointing to Betty Williams and Miss Warwick, "There
they are--do your duty, Mr. Constable: I'll swear to my lace."

"And I'll swear to my black thumbs," said the printer's devil.

"I saw the lace hanging out of her pocket, and there's the marks of my
fingers upon it, Mr. Constable."

"Fellow!" cried Miss Hodges, taking the constable by the arm, "this is
my apartment, into which no minion of the law has a right to enter; for,
in England, every man's house is his castle."

"I know that as well as you do, _madam!_" said the constable; "but I
make it a principle to do nothing without a warrant: here's my warrant."

"Oh, shave me! the lace is hers inteet!" cried Betty Williams, pointing
to Miss Warwick. "Oh, miss is my mistress inteet--"

"Come, mistress or miss, then, you'll be pleased to come along with
me," said the constable, seizing hold of Angelina--"like mistress, like
maid."

"Villain! unfeeling villain! oh, unhand my Angelina, or I shall die! I
shall die!" exclaimed Araminta, falling into the arms of Nat Gazabo, who
immediately held the replenished glass of brandy to her lips--"Oh, my
Angelina, my Angelina!"

Struck with horror at her situation, Miss Warwick shrunk from the grasp
of the constable, and leaned motionless on the back of a chair.

"Come, my angel, as they call you, I think--the lady there has brandy
enough, if you want spirits--all the fits and faintings in Christendom
won't serve you now. I'm used to the tricks o' the trade.--The law must
take its course; and if you can't walk, I must carry you."

"Touch me at your peril! I am innocent," said Angelina.

"Innocent--innocence itself! pure, spotless, injured innocence!"
cried Miss Hodges. "I shall die! I shall die! I shall die on the spot!
barbarous, barbarous villain!"

Whilst Miss Hodges spoke, the ready Nat poured out a fresh glass of that
restorative, which he always had ready for cases of life and death; and
she screamed and sipped, and sipped and screamed, as the constable took
up Angelina in his arms, and carried her towards the door.

"Mrs. Innocence," said the man, "you shall see whom you shall see."

Mrs. Puffit opened the door; and, to the utter astonishment of every
body present, Lady Diana Chillingworth entered the room, followed
by Lady Frances Somerset and Mrs. Bertrand. The constable set down
Angelina. Miss Hodges set down the glass of brandy. Mrs. Puffit
curtsied. Betty Williams stretched out her arms to Lady Diana, crying,
"Shave me! shave me this once!" Miss Warwick hid her face with her
hands.

"Only my Valenciennes lace, that has been found in that girl's pocket,
and--" said Mrs. Puffit.

Lady Diana Chillingworth turned away with indescribable haughtiness,
and, addressing herself to her sister, said, "Lady Frances Somerset, you
would not, I presume, have Lady Diana Chillingworth lend her countenance
to such a scene as this--I hope, sister, that you are satisfied now." As
she said these words, her ladyship walked out of the room.

"Never was further from being satisfied in my life," said Lady Frances.

"If you look at this, my lady," said the constable, holding out the
lace, "you'll soon be satisfied as to what sort of a young lady _that_
is."

"Oh, you mistake the young lady," said Mrs. Bertrand, and she whispered
to the constable. "Come away: you may be sure you'll be satisfied--we
shall all be satisfied, handsomely, all in good time. Don't let the
_delinquency_ there on her knees," added she aloud, pointing to Betty
Williams--"don't let the _delinquency_ there on her knees escape."

"Come along, mistress," said the constable, pulling up Betty Williams
from her knees. "But I say the law must have its course, if I am not
satisfied."

"Oh, I am confident," said Mrs. Puffit, the milliner, "we shall all be
satisfied, no doubt; but Lady Di. Chillingworth knows my Valenciennes
lace, and Miss Burrage too, for they did me this morning the honour--"

"Will you do me the favour," interrupted Lady Frances Somerset, "to
leave us, good Mrs. Puffit, for the present? Here is some mistake--the
less noise we make about it the better. You shall be satisfied."

"Oh, your ladyship--I'm sure, I'm confident--I shan't utter another
syllable--nor never would have articulated a syllable about the lace
(though Valenciennes, and worth thirty guineas, if it is worth a
farthing), had I had the least intimacy or suspicion the young lady was
your la'ship's protégée. I shan't, at any rate, utter another syllable."

Mrs. Puffit, having glibly run off this speech, left the room, and
carried in her train the constable and Betty Williams, the printer's
devil, and Mrs. Bertrand, the woman of the house.

Miss Warwick, whose confusion during this whole scene was excessive,
stood without power to speak or move.

"Thank God, they are gone!" said Lady Frances; and she went to Angelina,
and taking her hands gently from before her face, said, in a soothing
tone, "Miss Warwick, your friend, Lady Frances Somerset, you cannot
think that she suspects--"

"La, dear, no!" cried Nat Gazabo, who had now sufficiently recovered
from his fright and amazement to be able to speak: "Dear heart! who
could go for to suspect such a thing? but they made such a bustle and
noise, they quite flabbergasted me, so _many_ on them in this small
room. Please to sit down, my lady.--Is there any thing I can do?"

"If you could have the goodness, sir, to leave us for a few minutes,"
said Lady Frances, in a polite, persuasive manner--"you could have the
goodness, sir, to leave us for a few minutes."

Nat, who was not _always_ spoken to by so gentle a voice, smiled, bowed,
and was retiring, when Miss Hodges came forward with an air of defiance:
"Aristocratic insolence!" exclaimed she: "Stop, Nat--stir not a foot, at
your peril, at the word of command of any of the privileged orders upon
earth--stir not a foot, at your peril, at the behest of any titled _She_
in the universe!--Madam, or my lady--or by whatever other name more
high, more low, you choose to be addressed--this is my husband."

"Very probably, madam," said Lady Frances, with an easy calmness, which
provoked Miss Hodges to a louder tone of indignation.

"Stir not a foot, at your peril, Nat," cried she. "I will defend him,
I say, madam, against every shadow, every penumbra of aristocratic
insolence."

"As you and he think proper, madam," replied Lady Frances. "'Tis easy to
defend the gentleman against shadows."

Miss Hodges marched up and down the room with her arms folded. Nat stood
stock still.

"The woman," whispered Lady Frances to Miss Warwick, "is either mad or
drunk--or both; at all events we shall be better in another room." As
she spoke, she drew Miss Warwick's arm within hers.--"Will you allow
aristocratic insolence to pass by you, sir?" said she to Nat Gazabo, who
stood like a statue in the doorway--he edged himself aside.

"And is this your independence of soul, my Angelina?" cried Araminta,
setting her back to the door, so as effectually to prevent her from
passing--"and is this your independence of soul, my Angelina--thus, thus
tamely to submit, to resign yourself again to your unfeeling, proud,
prejudiced, intellect-lacking persecutors?"

"This lady is my _friend_, madam," said Angelina, in as firm and
tranquil a tone as she could command, for she was quite terrified by her
Araminta's violence.

"Take your choice, my dear; stay or follow me, as you think best," said
Lady Frances.

"Your friend!" pursued the oratorical lady, detaining Miss Warwick with
a heavy hand: "Do you feel the force of the word? _Can_ you feel it, as
I once thought you could? Your friend! am not _I_ your friend, your
best friend, my Angelina? your own Araminta, your amiable Araminta, your
_unknown friend?_"

"My _unknown_ friend, indeed!" said Angelina. Miss Hodges let go her
struggling hand, and Miss Warwick that instant followed Lady Frances,
who, having effected her retreat, had by this time gained the staircase.

"Gone!" cried Miss Hodges; "then never will I see or speak to her more.
Thus I whistle her off, and let her down the wind to prey at fortune."

"Gracious heart! what quarrels," said Nat, "and doings, the night before
our wedding-day!"

We leave this well-matched pair to their happy prospects of conjugal
union and equality.

Lady Frances, who perceived that Miss Warwick was scarcely able to
support herself, led her to a sofa, which she luckily saw through the
half-open door of a drawing-room, at the head of the staircase.

"To be taken for a thief!--Oh, to what have I exposed myself!" said Miss
Warwick.

"Sit down, my dear, now we are in a room where we need not fear
interruption--sit down, and don't tremble like an aspen leaf," said Lady
Frances Somerset, who saw that at this moment, reproaches would have
been equally unnecessary and cruel.

Unused to be treated with judicious kindness, Angelina's heart was
deeply touched by it, and she opened her whole mind to Lady Frances,
with the frankness of a young person conscious of her own folly, not
desirous to apologize or extenuate, but anxious to regain the esteem of
a friend.

"To be sure, my dear, it was, as you say, rather foolish to set out in
quest of an _unknown friend_," said Lady Frances, after listening to the
confessions of Angelina. "And why, after all, was it necessary to have
an elopement?"

"Oh, madam, I am sensible of my folly--I had long formed a project of
living in a cottage in Wales--and Miss Burrage described Wales to me as
a terrestrial paradise."

"Miss Burrage! then why did she not go to paradise along with you?" said
Lady Frances.

"I don't know--she was was so much attached to Lady Di. Chillingworth,
she said, she could never think of leaving her: she charged me never
to mention the cottage scheme to Lady Di., who would only laugh at it.
Indeed, Lady Di. was almost always out whilst we were in London, or
dressing, or at cards, and I could seldom speak to her, especially
about cottages; and I wished for a friend, to whom I could open my whole
heart, and whom I could love and esteem, and who should have the same
tastes and notions with myself."

"I am sorry that last condition is part of your definition of a friend,"
said Lady Frances, smiling; "for I will not swear that my notions are
the same as yours, but yet I think you would have found me as good a
friend as this Araminta of yours. Was it necessary to perfect felicity
to have an _unknown friend_?"

"Ah! there was my mistake," said Miss Warwick. "I had read Araminta's
writings, and they speak so charmingly of friendship and felicity, that
I thought

     'Those best can paint them who can feel them most.'"

"No uncommon mistake," said Lady Frances.

"But I am fully sensible of my folly," said Angelina.

"Then there is no occasion to say any more about it at
present--to-morrow, as you like romances, we'll read Arabella, or the
Female Quixote; and you shall tell me which, of all your acquaintance,
the heroine resembles most. And in the mean time, as you seem to have
satisfied your curiosity about your _unknown friend_, will you come home
with me?"

"Oh, madam," said Angelina, with emotion, "your goodness--"

"But we have not time to talk of my goodness yet--stay--let me see--yes,
it will be best that it should be known that you are with us as soon as
possible--for there is a thing, my dear, of which, perhaps, you are not
fully sensible--of which you are too young to be fully sensible--that,
to people who have nothing to do or to say, scandal is a necessary
luxury of life; and that, by such a step as you have taken, you have
given room enough for scandal-mongers to make you and your friends
completely miserable."

Angelina burst into tears--though a sentimental lady, she had not yet
acquired the art of _bursting into tears_ upon every trifling occasion.
Hers were tears of real feeling. Lady Frances was glad to see that she
had made a sufficient impression upon her mind; but she assured Angelina
that she did not intend to torment her with useless lectures and
reproaches. Lady Frances Somerset understood the art of giving advice
rather better than Lady Diana Chillingworth.

"_I_ do not mean, my dear," said Lady Frances, "to make you miserable
for life--but I mean to make an impression upon you that may make you
prudent and happy for life. So don't cry till you make your eyes so
red as not to be fit to be seen at the play to-night, where they
must--positively--be seen."

"But Lady Diana is below," said Miss Warwick: "I am ashamed and afraid
to see her again."

"It will be difficult, but I hope not impossible, to convince my
sister," said Lady Frances, "that you clearly understand that you have
been a simpleton; but that a simpleton of sixteen is more an object
of mercy than a simpleton of sixty--so my verdict is--Guilty;--but
recommended to mercy."

By this mercy Angelina was more touched than she could have been by the
most severe reproaches.



CHAPTER V.

Whilst the preceding conversation was passing, Lady Diana Chillingworth
was in Mrs. Bertrand's fruit-shop, occupied with her smelling-bottle and
Miss Burrage. Clara Hope was there also, and Mrs. Puffit, the milliner,
and Mrs. Bertrand, who was assuring her ladyship that not a word of the
affair about the young lady and the lace should go out of her house.

"Your la'ship need not be in the least uneasy," said Mrs. Bertrand,
"for I have satisfied the constable, and satisfied every body; and the
constable allows Miss Warwick's name was not mentioned in the warrant;
and as to the servant girl, she's gone before the magistrate, who, of
course, will send her to the house of correction; but that will no ways
implicate the young lady, and nothing shall transpire from this house
detrimental to the young lady, who is under your la'ship's protection.
And I'll tell your la'ship how Mrs. Puffit and I have settled to tell
the story: with your ladyship's approbation, I shall say--"

"Nothing, if you please," said her ladyship, with more than her usual
haughtiness. "The young lady to whom you allude is under Lady Frances
Somerset's protection, not mine; and whatever you do or say, I beg that
in this affair the name of Lady Diana Chillingworth may not be used."

She turned her back upon the disconcerted milliner as she finished this
speech, and walked to the furthest end of the long room, followed by the
constant flatterer of all her humours, Miss Burrage.

The milliner and Mrs. Bertrand now began to console themselves for the
mortification they had received from her ladyship's pride, and for the
insolent forgetfulness of her companion, by abusing them both in a low
voice. Mrs. Bertrand began with, "Her ladyship's so touchy and so proud;
she's as high as the moon, and higher."

"Oh, all the Chillingworths, by all accounts, are so," said Mrs. Puffit;
"but then, to be sure, they have a right to be so if any body has, for
they certainly are real high-horn people. But I can't tolerate to
see some people, that aren't no ways born nor entitled to it, give
themselves such airs as some people do. Now, there's that Miss Burrage,
that pretends not to know me, ma'am."

"And me, ma'am,--just the same: such provoking assurance--I that knew
her from this high."

"On St. Augustin's Back, you know," said Mrs. Puffit.

"On St. Augustin's Back, you know," echoed Mrs. Bertrand.

"So I told her this morning, ma'am," said Mrs. Puffit.

"And so I told her this evening, ma'am, when the three Miss Herrings
came in to give me a call in their way to the play; girls that she used
to walk with, ma'am, for ever and ever in the green, you know."

"Yes; and that she was always glad to drink tea with, ma'am, when asked,
you know," said Mrs. Puffit.

"Well, ma'am," pursued Mrs. Bertrand, "here she had the impudence to
pretend not to know them. She takes up her glass--my Lady Di. herself
couldn't have done it better, and squeezes up her ugly face this way,
pretending to be near-sighted, though she can see as well as you or I
can."

"Such airs! _she_ near-sighted!" said Mrs. Puffit: "what will the world
come to!"

"Oh, I wish her pride may have a fall," resumed the provoked milliner,
as soon as she had breath. "I dare to say now she wouldn't know her
own relations if she was to meet them; I'd lay any wager she would
not vouchsafe a curtsy to that good old John Barker, the friend of her
father, you know, who gave up to this Miss Burrage I don't know how many
hundreds of pounds, that were due to him, or else miss wouldn't have had
a farthing in the world; yet now, I'll be bound, she'd forget this as
well as St. Augustin's Back, and wouldn't know John Barker from Abraham;
and I don't doubt that she'd pull out her glass at her aunt Dinah,
because she is a cheesemonger's widow."

"Oh no," said Mrs. Bertrand, "she couldn't have the baseness to be
near-sighted to good Dinah Plait, that bred her up, and was all in all
to her."

Just as Mrs. Bertrand finished speaking, into the fruit-shop walked the
very persons of whom she had been talking--Dinah Plait and Mr. Barker.

"Mrs. Dinah Plait, I declare!" exclaimed Mrs. Bertrand.

"I never was so glad to see you, Mrs. Plait and Mr. Barker, in all my
days," said Mrs. Puffit.

"Why you should be so particularly glad to see me, Mrs. Puffit, I don't
know," said Mr. Barker, laughing; "but I'm not surprised Dinah Plait
should be a welcome guest wherever she goes, especially with a purse
full of guineas in her hand."

"Friend Bertrand," said Dinah Plait, producing a purse which she held
under her cloak, "I am come to restore this purse to its rightful
owner: after a great deal of trouble, John Barker (who never thinks it a
trouble to do good) hath traced her to your house."

"There is a young lady here, to be sure," said Mrs. Bertrand, "but
you can't see her just at present, for she is talking on _petticlar_
business with my Lady Frances Somerset above stairs."

"Tis well," said Dinah Plait: "I would willingly restore this purse, not
to the young creature herself, but to some of her friends,--for I fear
she is not quite in a right state of mind. If I could see any of the
young lady's friends."

"Miss Burrage," cried Mrs. Bertrand, in a tone of voice so loud that
she could not avoid hearing it, "are not you one of the young lady's
friends?"

"What young lady's friend?" replied Miss Burrage, without stirring from
her seat.

"Miss Burrage, here's a purse for a young lady," said Mrs. Puffit.

"A purse for whom? Where?" said Miss Burrage, at last deigning to rise,
and come out of her recess.

"There, ma'am," said the milliner. "Now for her glass!" whispered Mrs.
Puffit to Mrs. Bertrand. And, exactly as it had been predicted, Miss
Burrage eyed her aunt Dinah through her glass, pretending not to know
her. "The purse is not mine," said she, coolly: "I know nothing of
it--nothing."

"Hetty!" exclaimed her aunt; but as Miss Burrage still eyed her through
her glass with unmoved invincible assurance, Dinah thought that, however
strong the resemblance, she was mistaken. "No, it can't be Hetty. I beg
pardon, madam," said she, "but I took you for--Did not I hear you say
the name of Burrage, friend Puffit?"

"Yes, Burrage; one of the Burrages of Dorsetshire," said the milliner,
with malicious archness.

"One of the Burrages of Dorsetshire: I beg pardon. But did you ever see
such a likeness, friend Barker, to my poor niece, Hetty Burrage?"

Miss Burrage, who overheard these words, immediately turned her back
upon her aunt. "A grotesque statue of starch,--one of your quakers, I
think, they call themselves: Bristol is full of such primitive figures,"
said Miss Burrage to Clara Hope, and she walked back to the recess and
to Lady Di.

"So like, voice and all, to my poor Hester," said Dinah Plait, and she
wiped the tears from her eyes. "Though Hetty has neglected me so of
late, I have a tenderness for her; we cannot but have some for our own
relations."

"Grotesque or not, 'tis a statue that seems to have a heart, and a gude
one," said Clara Hope.

"I wish we could say the same of every body," said Mrs. Bertrand.

All this time, old Mr. Barker, leaning on his cane, had been silent:
"Burrage of Dorsetshire!" said he; "I'll soon see whether she be or no;
for Hetty has a wart on her chin that I cannot forget, let her forget
whom and what she pleases."

Mr. Barker, who was a plain-spoken, determined man, followed the young
lady to the recess; and, after looking her full in the face, exclaimed
in a loud voice, "Here's the wart!--'tis Hetty!"

"Sir!--wart!--man!--Lady Di.!" cried Miss Burrage, in accents of the
utmost distress and vexation.

Mr. Barker, regardless of her frowns and struggles, would by no means
relinquish her hand; but leading, or rather pulling her forwards, he
went on with barbarous steadiness: "Dinah," said he, "'tis your
own niece. Hetty, 'tis your own aunt, that bred you up! What,
struggle--Burrage of Dorsetshire!"

"There certainly," said Lady Diana Chillingworth, in a solemn tone, "is
a conspiracy, this night, against my poor nerves. These people, amongst
them, will infallibly surprise me to death. What is the matter now?--why
do you drag the young lady, sir? She came here with _me_, sir,--with
Lady Diana Chillingworth; and, consequently, she is not a person to be
insulted."

"Insult her!" said Mr. Barker, whose sturdy simplicity was not to be
baffled or disconcerted either by the cunning of Miss Burrage, or by the
imposing manner and awful name of Lady Diana Chillingworth. "Insult her!
why, 'tis she insults us; she won't know us."

"How should Miss Burrage know you, sir, or any body here?" said Lady
Diana, looking round, as if upon beings of a species different from her
own.

"How should she know her own aunt that bred her up?" said the invincible
John Barker, "and me who have had her on my knee a hundred times, giving
her barley-sugar till she was sick?"

"Sick! I am sure you make me sick," said Lady Diana. "Sir, that young
lady is one of the Burrages of Dorsetshire, as good a family as any in
England."

"Madam," said John Barker, replying in a solemnity of tone equal to
her ladyship's, "that young lady is one of the Burrages of Bristol,
drysalters; niece to Dinah Plait, who is widow to a man, who was, in his
time, as honest a cheesemonger as any in England."

"Miss Burrage!--My God!--don't you speak!" cried Lady Diana, in a voice
of terror.

"The young lady is bashful, my lady, among strangers," said Mrs.
Bertrand.

"Oh, Hester Burrage, is this kind of thee?" said Dinah Plait, with in
accent of mixed sorrow and affection; "but thou art my niece, and I
forgive thee."

"A cheesemonger's niece!" cried Lady Diana, with horror; "how have I
been deceived! But this is the consequence of making acquaintance at
Buxton, and those watering-places: I've done with her, however. Lord
bless me! here comes my sister, Lady Frances! Good heavens! my dear,"
continued her ladyship, going to meet her sister, and drawing her
into the recess at the farthest end of the room, "here are more
misfortunes--misfortunes without end. What will the world say? Here's
this Miss Burrage,--take no more notice of her, sister; she's an
impostor; who do you think she turns out to be? Daughter to a drysalter,
niece to a cheesemonger! Only conceive!--a person that has been going
about with _me_ every where!--What will the world say?"

"That it is very imprudent to have _unknown friends_, my dear," replied
Lady Frances. "The best thing you can possibly do is to say nothing
about the matter, and to receive this penitent ward of yours without
reproaches; for if you talk of her _unknown friends_, the world will
certainly talk of yours."

Lady Diana drew back with haughtiness when her sister offered to put
Miss Warwick's hands into hers; but she condescended to say, after an
apparent struggle with herself, "I am happy to hear, Miss Warwick,
that you have returned to your senses. Lady Frances takes you under her
protection, I understand; at which, for all our sakes, I rejoice; and I
have only one piece of advice, Miss Warwick, to give you--"

"Keep it till after the play, my dear Diana," whispered Lady Frances;
"it will have more effect."

"The play!--Bless me!" said Lady Diana, "why, you have contrived to
make Miss Warwick fit to be seen, I protest. But, after all I have
gone through to-night, how can I appear in public? My dear, this Miss
Burrage's business has given me such a shock,--such nervous affections!"

"Nervous affections!--Some people, I do believe, have none but nervous
affections," thought Lady Frances.

"Permit me," said Mrs. Dinah Plait, coming up to Lady Frances, and
presenting Miss Warwick's purse--"permit me, as thou seemest to be a
friend to this young lady, to restore to thee her purse, which she left
by mistake at my house this forenoon. I hope she is better, poor thing!"

"She _is_ better, and I thank you for her, madam," said Lady Frances,
who was struck with the obliging manner and benevolent countenance of
Dinah Plait, and who did not think herself contaminated by standing in
the same room with the widow of a cheesemonger.

"Let me thank you myself, madam," said Angelina; "I am perfectly in my
senses _now_, I can assure you; and I shall never forget the kindness
which you and this benevolent gentleman showed me when you thought I was
in real distress."

"Some people are more grateful than other people," said Mrs. Puffit,
looking at Miss Burrage, who in mortified, sullen silence, followed the
aunt and the benefactor of whom she was ashamed, and who had reason to
be ashamed of her.

We do not imagine that our readers can be much interested for a young
lady who was such a compound of pride and meanness; we shall therefore
only add, that her future life was spent on St. Augustin's Back, where
she made herself at once as ridiculous and as unhappy as she deserved to
be.

As for our heroine, under the friendly and judicious care of Lady
Frances Somerset, she acquired that which is more useful to the
possessor than genius--good sense. Instead of rambling over the world
in search of an _unknown friend_, she attached herself to those of whose
worth she received proofs more convincing than a letter of three folio
sheets, stuffed with sentimental nonsense. In short, we have now, in the
name of Angelina Warwick, the pleasure to assure all those whom it may
concern, that it is possible for a young lady of sixteen to cure herself
of the affectation of sensibility, and the folly of romance.



THE GOOD FRENCH GOVERNESS

Among the sufferers during the bloody reign of Robespierre, was Mad. de
Rosier, a lady of good family, excellent understanding, and most amiable
character. Her husband, and her only son, a promising young man of about
fourteen, were dragged to the horrid prison of the Conciergerie, and
their names, soon afterward, appeared in the list of those who fell
a sacrifice to the tyrant's cruelty. By the assistance of a faithful
domestic, Mad. de Rosier, who was destined to be the next victim,
escaped from France, and took refuge in England--England!--that generous
country, which, in favour of the unfortunate, forgets her national
prejudices, and to whom, in their utmost need, even her "_natural
enemies_" fly for protection. English travellers have sometimes been
accused of forgetting the civilities which they receive in foreign
countries; but their conduct towards the French emigrants has
sufficiently demonstrated the injustice of this reproach.

Mad. de Rosier had reason to be pleased by the delicacy of several
families of distinction in London, who offered her their services under
the name of gratitude; but she was incapable of encroaching upon the
kindness of her friends. Misfortune had not extinguished the energy
of her mind, and she still possessed the power of maintaining herself
honourably by her own exertions. Her character and her abilities being
well known, she easily procured recommendations as a preceptress. Many
ladies anxiously desired to engage such a governess for their children,
but Mrs. Harcourt had the good fortune to obtain the preference.

Mrs. Harcourt was a widow, who had been a very fine woman, and continued
to be a very fine lady; she had good abilities, but, as she lived in
a constant round of dissipation, she had not time to cultivate her
understanding, or to attend to the education of her family; and she had
satisfied her conscience by procuring for her daughters a fashionable
governess and expensive masters. The governess whose place Mad. de
Rosier was now to supply, had quitted her pupils, to go abroad with a
lady of quality, and Mrs. Harcourt knew enough of the world to bear her
loss without emotion;--she, however, stayed at home one whole evening,
to receive Mad. de Rosier, and to introduce her to her pupils. Mrs.
Harcourt had three daughters and a son--Isabella, Matilda, Favoretta,
and Herbert. Isabella was about fourteen; her countenance was
intelligent, but rather too expressive of confidence in her own
capacity, for she had, from her infancy, been taught to believe that she
was a genius. Her memory had been too much cultivated; she had learned
languages with facility, and had been taught to set a very high value
upon her knowledge of history and chronology. Her temper had been hurt
by flattery, yet she was capable of feeling all the generous passions.

Matilda was a year younger than Isabella; she was handsome, but her
countenance, at first view, gave the idea of hopeless indolence; she
did not learn the French and Italian irregular verbs by rote as
expeditiously as her sister, and her impatient preceptress pronounced,
with an irrevocable nod, that Miss Matilda was _no_ genius. The phrase
was quickly caught by her masters, so that Matilda, undervalued even
by her sister, lost all confidence in herself, and with the hope of
success, lost the wish for exertion. Her attention gradually turned to
dress and personal accomplishments; not that she was vain of her beauty,
but she had more hopes of pleasing by the graces of her person than of
her mind. The timid, anxious blush, which Mad. De Rosier observed to
vary in Matilda's countenance, when she spoke to those for whom she felt
affection, convinced this lady that, if Matilda were _no_ genius, it
must have been the fault of her education. On sensibility, all that is
called genius, perhaps, originally depends: those who are capable of
feeling a strong degree of pain and pleasure may surely be excited
to great and persevering exertion, by calling the proper motives into
action.

Favoretta, the youngest daughter, was about six years old. At this
age, the habits that constitute character are not formed, and it is,
therefore, absurd to speak of the character of a child six years old.
Favoretta had been, from her birth, the plaything of her mother and of
her mother's waiting-maid. She was always produced, when Mrs. Harcourt
had company, to be admired and caressed by the fashionable circle;
her ringlets and her lively nonsense were the never-failing means of
attracting attention from visitors. In the drawing-room, Favoretta,
consequently, was happy, always in high spirits, and the picture of good
humour; but, change the scene, and Favoretta no longer appeared the same
person: when alone, she was idle and spiritless; when with her maid
or with her brother and sisters, pettish and capricious. Her
usual play-fellow was Herbert, but their plays regularly ended in
quarrels--quarrels in which both parties were commonly in the wrong,
though the whole of the blame necessarily fell upon Herbert, for Herbert
was neither caressing nor caressed. Mrs. Grace, the waiting-maid,
pronounced him to be the plague of her life, and prophesied evil of him,
because, as she averred, if she combed his hair a hundred times a day,
it would never be fit to be seen; besides this, she declared "there was
no managing to keep him out of mischief," and he was so "thick-headed
at his book," that Mrs. Grace, on whom the task of teaching him
his alphabet had, during the negligent reign of the late governess,
devolved, affirmed that he never would learn to read like any other
young gentleman. Whether the zeal of Mrs. Grace for his literary
progress were of service to his understanding, may be doubted; there
could be no doubt of its effect upon his temper; a sullen gloom
overspread Herbert's countenance, whenever the shrill call of "Come and
say your task, Master Herbert!" was heard; and the continual use of the
imperative mood--"Let that alone, _do_, Master Herbert!"--"Don't make a
racket, Master Herbert!"--"Do hold your tongue and sit still where I bid
you, Master Herbert!" operated so powerfully upon this young gentleman,
that, at eight years old, he partly fulfilled his tormentor's
prophecies, for he became a little surly rebel, who took pleasure in
doing exactly the contrary to every thing that he was desired to do,
and who took pride in opposing his powers of endurance to the force
of punishment. His situation was scarcely more agreeable in the
drawing-room than in the nursery, for his mother usually announced
him to the company by the appropriate appellation of _Roughhead_; and
Herbert _Roughhead_ being assailed, at his entrance into the room, by
a variety of petty reproaches and maternal witticisms upon his uncouth
appearance, became bashful and awkward, averse from _polite_ society,
and prone to the less fastidious company of servants in the stable and
the kitchen. Mrs. Harcourt absolutely forbade his intercourse with the
postilions, though she did not think it necessary to be so strict in her
injunctions as to the butler and footman; because, argued she, "children
will get to the servants when one's from home, and it is best that they
should be with such of them as one can trust. Now Stephen is quite a
person one can entirely depend upon, and he has been so long in the
family, the children are quite used to him, and safe with him."

How many mothers have a Stephen, on whom they can entirely depend!

Mrs. Harcourt, with politeness, which in this instance supplied the
place of good sense, invested Mad. de Rosier with full powers, as the
preceptress of her children, except as to their religious education; she
stipulated that Catholic tenets should not be instilled into them. To
this Mad. de Rosier replied--"that children usually follow the religion
of their parents, and that proselytes seldom do honour to their
conversion; that were she, on the other hand, to attempt to promote her
pupils' belief in the religion of their country, her utmost powers could
add nothing to the force of public religious instruction, and to the
arguments of those books which are necessarily put into the hands of
every well-educated person."

With these opinions, Mad. de Rosier readily promised to abstain from
all direct or indirect interference in the religious instruction of her
pupils. Mrs. Harcourt then introduced her to them as "a friend, in whom
she had entire confidence, and whom she hoped and believed they would
make it their study to please."

Whilst the ceremonies of the introduction were going on, Herbert kept
himself aloof, and, with his whip suspended over the stick on which he
was riding, eyed Mad. de Rosier with no friendly aspect: however, when
she held out her hand to him, and when he heard the encouraging tone of
her voice, he approached, held his whip fast in his right hand, but very
cordially gave the lady his left to shake.

"Are you to be my governess?" said he: "you won't give me very long
tasks, will you?"

"Favoretta, my dear, what has detained you so long?" cried Mrs.
Harcourt, as the door opened, and as Favoretta, with her hair in nice
order, was ushered into the room by Mrs. Grace. The little girl ran up
to Mad. de Rosier, and, with the most caressing freedom, cried,--

"Will you love me? I have not my red shoes on to-day!"

Whilst Mad. de Rosier assured Favoretta that the want of the red shoes
would not diminish her merit, Matilda whispered to Isabella--"Mourning
is very becoming to her, though she is not fair;" and Isabella, with a
look of absence, replied--"But she speaks English amazingly well for a
French woman."

Mad. de Rosier did speak English remarkably well; she had spent some
years in England, in her early youth, and, perhaps, the effect of her
conversation was heightened by an air of foreign novelty. As she was
not hackneyed in the common language of conversation, her ideas were
expressed in select and accurate terms, so that her thoughts appeared
original, as well as just.

Isabella, who was fond of talents, and yet fonder of novelty, was
charmed, the first evening, with her new friend, more especially as
she perceived that her abilities had not escaped Mad. de Rosier. She
displayed all her little treasures of literature, but was surprised to
observe that, though every shining thing she said was taken notice of,
nothing dazzled the eyes of her judge; gradually her desire to talk
subsided, and she felt some curiosity to hear. She experienced the
new pleasure of conversing with a person whom she perceived to be her
superior in understanding, and whose superiority she could admire,
without any mixture of envy.

"Then," said she, pausing, one day, after having successfully enumerated
the dates of the reigns of all the English kings, "I suppose you have
something in French, like our Gray's Memoria Technica, or else you never
could have such a prodigious quantity of dates in your head. Had you
as much knowledge of chronology and history, when you were of my age,
as--as--"

"As you have?" said Mad. de Rosier: "I do not know whether I had at your
age, but I can assure you that I have not now."

"Nay," replied Isabella, with an incredulous smile, "but you only say
that from modesty."

"From vanity, more likely."

"Vanity! impossible--you don't understand me."

"Pardon me, but you do not understand _me_."

"A person," cried Isabella, "can't, surely, be vain--what we, in
English, call vain--of _not_ remembering any thing."

"Is it, then, impossible that a person should be what you, in English,
call vain, of _not_ remembering what is useless? I dare say you can tell
me the name of that wise man who prayed for the art of forgetting."

"No, indeed, I don't know his name; I never heard of him before: was he
a Grecian, or a Roman, or an Englishman? can't you recollect his name?
what does it begin with?"

"I do not wish either for your sake or my own, to remember the name;
let us content ourselves with the wise man's sense, whether he were a
Grecian, a Roman, or an Englishman: even the first letter of his name
might be left among the useless things--might it not?"

"But," replied Isabella, a little piqued, "I do not know what you call
useless."

"Those of which you can make no use," said Mad. de Rosier, with
simplicity.

"You don't mean, though, all the names, and dates, and kings, and Roman
emperors, and all the remarkable events that I have learned by heart?"

"It is useful, I allow," replied Mad. de Rosier, "to know by heart the
names of the English kings and Roman emperors, and to remember the dates
of their reigns, otherwise we should be obliged, whenever we wanted
them, to search in the books in which they are to be found, and that
wastes time."

"Wastes time--yes; but what's worse," said Isabella, "a person looks so
awkward and foolish in company, who does not know these things--things
that every body knows."

"And that every body is supposed to know," added Mad. de Rosier.

"_That_ never struck me before," said Isabella, ingenuously; "I only
remembered these things to repeat in conversation."

Here Mad. de Rosier, pleased to observe that her pupil had caught an
idea that was new to her, dropped the conversation, and left Isabella
to apply what had passed. Active and ingenious young people should have
much left to their own intelligent exertions, and to their own candour.

Matilda, the second daughter, was at first pleased with Mad. de
Rosier, because she looked well in mourning; and afterwards she became
interested for her, from hearing the history of her misfortunes, of
which Mad. de Rosier, one evening, gave her a simple, pathetic account.
Matilda was particularly touched by the account of the early death of
this lady's beautiful and accomplished daughter; she dwelt upon every
circumstance, and, with anxious curiosity, asked a variety of questions.

"I think I can form a perfect idea of her now," said Matilda, after
she had inquired concerning the colour of her hair, of her eyes, her
complexion, her height, her voice, her manners, and her dress--"I think
I have a perfect idea of her now!"

"Oh no!" said Mad. de Rosier, with a sigh, "you cannot form a perfect
idea of my Rosalie from any of these things; she was handsome and
graceful; but it was not her person--it was her mind," said the mother,
with a faltering voice: her voice had, till this instant, been steady
and composed.

"I beg your pardon--I will ask you no more questions," said Matilda.

"My love," said Mad. de Rosier, "ask me as many as you please--I like
to think of _her_--I may now speak of her without vanity--her character
would have pleased you."

"I am sure it would," said Matilda: "do you think she would have liked
me or Isabella the best?"

"She would have liked each of you for your different good qualities, I
think: she would not have made her love an object of competition, or
the cause of jealousy between two sisters; she could make herself
sufficiently beloved, without stooping to any such mean arts. She had
two friends who loved her tenderly; they knew that she was perfectly
sincere, and that she would not flatter either of them--you know _that_
is only childish affection which is without esteem. Rosalie was esteemed
_autant qu'aimée_."

"How I should have liked such a friend! but I am afraid she would have
been so much my superior, she would have despised me--Isabella would
have had all her conversation, because she knows so much, and I know
nothing!"

"If you know that you know nothing," said Mad. de Rosier, with an
encouraging smile, "you know as much as the wisest of men. When the
oracle pronounced Socrates to be the wisest of men, he explained it by
observing, 'that he knew himself to be ignorant, whilst other men,' said
he, 'believing that they know every thing, are not likely to improve.'"

"Then you think I am likely to improve?" said Matilda, with a look of
doubtful hope.

"Certainly," said Mad. de Rosier: "if you exert yourself, you may be any
thing you please."

"Not any thing I please, for I should please to be as clever, and as
good, and as amiable, and as estimable, too, as your Rosalie--but that's
impossible. Tell me, however, what she was at my age--and what sort
of things she used to do and say--and what books she read--and how she
employed herself from morning till night."

"That must be for to-morrow," said Mad. de Rosier; "I must now show
Herbert the book of prints that he wanted to see."

It was the first time that Herbert had ever asked to look into a book.
Mad. de Rosier had taken him entirely out of the hands of Mrs. Grace,
and finding that his painful associations with the sight of the
syllables in his dog's-eared spelling-book could not immediately be
conquered, she prudently resolved to cultivate his powers of attention
upon other subjects, and not to return to syllabic difficulties, until
the young gentleman should have forgotten his literary misfortunes, and
acquired sufficient energy and patience to ensure success.

"It is of little consequence," said she, "whether the boy read a year
sooner or later; but it is of great consequence that he should love
literature."

"Certainly," said Mrs. Harcourt, to whom this observation was addressed;
"I am sure you will manage all those things properly--I leave him
entirely to you--Grace quite gives him up: if he read by the time we
must think of sending him to school I shall be satisfied--only keep him
out of my way," added she, laughing, "when he is stammering over that
unfortunate spelling-book, for I don't pretend to be gifted with the
patience of Job."

"Have you any objection," said Mad. de Rosier, "to my buying for him
some new toys?"

"None in the world--buy any thing you will--do any thing you please--I
give you carte blanche," said Mrs. Harcourt.

After Mad. de Rosier had been some time at Mrs. Harcourt's, and had
carefully studied the characters, or, more properly speaking, the
habits of all her pupils, she took them with her one morning to a large
toy-shop, or rather warehouse for toys, which had been lately opened,
under the direction of an ingenious gentleman, who had employed proper
workmen to execute rational toys for the rising generation.

When Herbert entered "the rational toy-shop," he looked all around, and,
with an air of disappointment, exclaimed, "Why, I see neither whips
nor horses! nor phaetons, nor coaches!"--"Nor dressed dolls!" said
Favoretta, in a reproachful tone--"nor baby houses!"--"Nor soldiers--nor
a drum!" continued Herbert.--"I am sure I never saw such a toy-shop,"
said Favoretta; "I expected the finest things that ever were seen,
because it was such a new _great_ shop, and here are nothing but
vulgar-looking things--great carts and wheel-barrows, and things fit for
orange-women's daughters, I think."

This sally of wit was not admired as much as it would have been by
Favoretta's flatterers in her mother's drawing-room:--her brother seized
upon the very cart which she had abused, and dragging it about the room,
with noisy joy, declared he had found out that it was better than a
coach and six that would hold nothing; and he was even satisfied without
horses, because he reflected that he could be the best horse himself;
and that wooden horses, after all, cannot gallop, and they never mind
if you whip them ever so much: "you must drag them along all the time,
though you make _believe_," said Herbert, "that they draw the coach of
themselves; if one gives them the least push, they tumble down on their
sides, and one must turn back, for ever and ever, to set them up upon
their wooden legs again. I don't like make-believe horses; I had rather
be both man and horse for myself." Then, whipping himself, he galloped
away, pleased with his centaur character.

When the little boy in Sacontala is offered for a plaything "_a peacock
of earthenware, painted with rich colours_," he answers, "_I shall
like the peacock if it can run and fly--not else_." The Indian drama of
Sacontala was written many centuries ago. Notwithstanding it has so long
been observed, that children dislike useless, motionless playthings,
it is but of late that more rational toys have been devised for their
amusements.

Whilst Herbert's cart rolled on, Favoretta viewed it with scornful eyes;
but at length, cured by the neglect of the spectators of this fit of
disdain, she condescended to be pleased, and spied a few things
worthy of her notice. Bilboquets, battledores, and shuttlecocks, she
acknowledged were no bad things--"And pray," said she, "what are those
pretty little baskets, Mad. de Rosier? And those others, which look as
if they were but just begun? And what are those strings, that look like
mamma's bell cords?--and is that a thing for making laces, such as Grace
laces me with? And what are those cabinets with little drawers for?"

Mad. de Rosier had taken notice of these little cabinets--they were for
young mineralogists; she was also tempted by a botanical apparatus; but
as her pupils were not immediately going into the country, where flowers
could be procured, she was forced to content herself with such things
as could afford them employment in town. The making of baskets, of
bell-ropes, and of cords for window-curtains, were occupations in which,
she thought, they might successfully employ themselves. The materials
for these little manufactures were here ready prepared; and only such
difficulties were left as children love to conquer. The materials for
the baskets, and a little magnifying glass, which Favoretta wished to
have, were just packed up in a basket, which was to serve for a model,
when Herbert's voice was heard at the other end of the shop: he was
exclaiming in an impatient tone, "I must and I will eat them, I say." He
had crept under the counter, and, unperceived by the busy shopman, had
dragged out of a pigeon-hole, near the ground, a parcel, wrapped up in
brown paper: he had seated himself upon the ground, with his back to the
company, and, with patience worthy of a better object, at length untied
the difficult knot, pulled off the string, and opened the parcel. Within
the brown paper there appeared a number of little packets, curiously
folded in paper of a light brown. Herbert opened one of these, and
finding that it contained a number of little round things which looked
like comfits, he raised the paper to his mouth, which opened wide to
receive them. The shopman stopping his arm, assured him that they were
"_not good to eat_;" but Herbert replied in the angry tone, which caught
Mad. de Rosier's ear. "They are the seeds of radishes, my dear," said
she: "if they be sown in the ground, they will become radishes; then
they will be fit to eat, but not till then. Taste them now, and try." He
willingly obeyed; but put the seeds very quickly out of his mouth, when
he found that they were not sweet. He then said "that he wished he
might have them, that he might sow them in the little garden behind his
mother's house, that they might be fit to eat some time or other."

Mad. de Rosier bought the radish-seeds, and ordered a little spade,
a hoe, and a watering-pot, to be sent home for him. Herbert's face
brightened with joy: he was surprised to find that any of his requests
were granted, because Grace had regularly reproved him for being
troublesome whenever he asked for any thing; hence he had learned to
have recourse to force or fraud to obtain his objects. He ventured now
to hold Mad. De Rosier by the gown: "Stay a little longer," said he; "I
want to look at every thing:" his curiosity dilated with his hopes. When
Mad. de Rosier complied with his request to "stay a little longer,"
he had even the politeness to push a stool towards her, saying, "You'd
better sit down; you will be tired of standing, as some people say they
are;--but I'm not one of them. Tell 'em to give me down that wonderful
thing, that I may see what it is, will you?"

The wonderful thing which had caught Herbert's attention was a dry
printing press. Mad. de Rosier was glad to procure this little machine
for Herbert, for she hoped that the new associations of pleasure which
he would form with the types in the little compositor's stick, would
efface the painful remembrance of his early difficulties with the
syllables in the spelling-book. She also purchased a box of models
of common furniture, which were made to take to pieces, and to be put
together again, and on which the names of all the parts were printed.
A number of other useful toys tempted her, but she determined not to be
too profuse: she did not wish to purchase the love of her little
pupils by presents; her object was to provide them with independent
occupations; to create a taste for industry, without the dangerous
excitation of continual variety.

Isabella was delighted with the idea of filling up a small biographical
chart, which resembled Priestley's; she was impatient also to draw the
map of the world upon a small silk balloon, which could be filled with
common air, or folded up flat at pleasure.

Matilda, after much hesitation, said she had decided in her mind, just
as they were going out of the shop. She chose a small loom for weaving
riband and tape, which Isabella admired, because she remembered to have
seen it described in "Townsend's Travels:" but, before the man could put
up the loom for Matilda, she begged to have a little machine for drawing
in perspective, because the person who showed it assured her that it
required _no sort of genius_ to draw perfectly well in perspective with
this instrument.

In their way home, Mad. de Rosier stopped the carriage at a circulating
library. "Are you going to ask for the novel we were talking of
yesterday?" cried Matilda.

"A novel!" said Isabella, contemptuously: "no, I dare say Mad. de Rosier
is not a novel-reader."

"Zeluco, sir, if you please," said Mad. de Rosier. "You see, Isabella,
notwithstanding the danger of forfeiting your good opinion, I have dared
to ask for a novel."

"Well, I always understood, I am sure," replied Isabella, disdainfully,
"that none but trifling, silly people were novel-readers."

"Were readers of trifling, silly novels, perhaps you mean," answered
Mad. de Rosier, with temper; "but I flatter myself you will not find
Zeluco either trifling or silly."

"No, not Zeluco, to be sure," said Isabella, recollecting herself; "for
now I remember Mr. Gibbon, the great historian, mentions Zeluco in one
of his letters; he says it is the best philosophical romance of the age.
I particularly remember _that_, because somebody had been talking of
Zeluco the very day I was reading that letter; and I asked my governess
to get it for me, but she said it was a novel--however, Mr. Gibbon calls
it a philosophical romance."

"The name," said Mad. de Rosier, "will not make such difference to _us_;
but I agree with you in thinking, that as people who cannot judge for
themselves are apt to be misled by names, it would be advantageous to
invent some new name for philosophical novels, that they may no longer
be contraband goods--that they may not be confounded with the trifling,
silly productions, for which you have so just a disdain."

"Now, ma'am, will you ask," cried Herbert, as the carriage stopped at
his mother's door--"will you ask whether the man has brought home my
spade and the watering-pot? I know you don't like that I should go to
the servants for what I want; but I'm in a great hurry for the spade,
because I want to dig the bed for my radishes before night: I've got my
seeds safe in my hand."

Mad. de Rosier, much pleased by this instance of obedience in her
impatient pupil, instantly inquired for what he wanted, to convince him
that it was possible he could have his wishes gratified by a person who
was not an inhabitant of the stable or the kitchen. Isabella might have
registered it in her list of remarkable events, that Herbert, this day,
was not seen with the butler, the footman, or the coachman. Mad. de
Rosier, who was aware of the force of habit, and who thought that no
evil could be greater than that of hazarding the integrity of her little
pupils, did not exact from them any promise of abstaining from the
company of the servants, with whom they had been accustomed to converse;
but she had provided the children with occupations, that they might
not be tempted, by idleness, to seek for improper companions; and, by
interesting herself with unaffected good-nature in their amusements, she
endeavoured to give them a taste for the sympathy of their superiors
in knowledge, instead of a desire for the flattery of inferiors. She
arranged their occupations in such a manner, that, without watching them
every instant, she might know what they were doing, and where they were;
and she showed so much readiness to procure for them any thing that
was reasonable, that they found it the shortest method to address
their petitions to her in the first instance. Children will necessarily
delight in the company of those who make them happy; Mad. de Rosier knew
how to make her pupils contented, by exciting them to employments in
which they felt that they were successful.

"Mamma! mamma! dear mamma!" cried Favoretta, running into the hall, and
stopping Mrs. Harcourt, who was dressed, and going out to dinner, "do
come into the parlour, to look at my basket, my beautiful basket, that I
am making _all_ myself."

"And _do_, mother, or some of ye, come out into the garden, and see the
bed that I've dug, with my own hands, for my radishes--I'm as hot as
fire, I know," said Herbert, pushing his hat back from his forehead.

"Oh! don't come near me with the watering-pot in your hand," said Mrs.
Harcourt, shrinking back, and looking at Herbert's hands, which were not
as white as her own.

"The carriage is but just come to the door, ma'am," said Isabella, who
next appeared in the hall; "I only want you for one instant, to show you
something that is to hang up in your dressing-room, when I have finished
it, mamma; it is really beautiful."

"Well, don't keep me long," said Mrs. Harcourt, "for, indeed, I am too
late already."

"Oh, no! indeed you will not be too late, mamma--only look at my
basket," said Favoretta, gently pulling her mother by the hand into the
parlour.--Isabella pointed to her silk globe, which was suspended in the
window, and, taking up her camel-hair pencil, cried, "Only look, ma'am,
how nicely I have traced the Rhine, the Po, the Elbe, and the Danube;
you see I have not finished Europe; it will be quite another looking
thing, when Asia, Africa, and America are done, and when the colours are
quite dry."

"Now, Isabella, pray let her look at my basket," cried the eager
Favoretta, holding up the scarcely begun basket--"I will do a row, to
show you how it is done;" and the little girl, with busy fingers, began
to weave. The ingenious and delicate appearance of the work, and the
happy countenance of the little workwoman, fixed the mother's pleased
attention, and she, for a moment, forgot that her carriage was waiting.

"The carriage is at the door, ma'am," said the footman.

"I must be gone!" cried Mrs. Harcourt, starting from her reverie. "What
am I doing here? I ought to have been away this half-hour--Matilda!--why
is not she amongst you?"

Matilda, apart from the busy company, was reading with so much
earnestness, that her mother called twice before she looked up.

"How happy you all look," continued Mrs. Harcourt; "and I am going to
one of those terrible _great_ dinners--I shan't eat one morsel; then
cards all night, which I hate as much as you do, Isabella--pity me, Mad.
de Rosier!--Good bye, happy creatures!"--and with some real and some
affected reluctance, Mrs. Harcourt departed.

It is easy to make children happy, for one evening, with new toys and
new employments; but the difficulty is to continue the pleasure of
occupation after it has lost its novelty: the power of habit may
well supply the place of the charm of novelty. Mad. de Rosier exerted
herself, for some weeks, to invent occupations for her pupils, that
she might induce in their minds a love for industry; and when they had
tasted the pleasure, and formed the habit of doing _something_, she now
and then suffered them to experience the misery of having nothing to do.
The state of _ennui_, when contrasted with that of pleasurable mental or
bodily activity, becomes odious and insupportable to children.

Our readers must have remarked that Herbert, when he seized upon the
radish-seeds in the rational toy-shop, had not then learned just notions
of the nature of property. Mad. de Rosier did not, like Mrs. Grace,
repeat ineffectually, fifty times a day--"Master Herbert, don't touch
that!" "Master Herbert, for shame!" "Let that alone, sir!" "Master
Herbert, how dare you, sir!" but she prudently began by putting
forbidden goods entirely out of his reach: thus she, at least, prevented
the necessity for perpetual, irritating prohibitions, and diminished
with the temptation the desire to disobey; she gave him some things
for his _own_ use, and scrupulously refrained from encroaching upon his
property: Isabella and Matilda followed her example, in this respect,
and thus practically explained to Herbert the meaning of the words
_mine_ and _yours_. He was extremely desirous of going with Mad. de
Rosier to different shops, but she coolly answered his entreaties by
observing, "that she could not venture to take him into any one's house,
till she was sure that he would not meddle with what was not his own."
Herbert now felt the inconvenience of his lawless habits: to enjoy the
pleasures, he perceived that it was necessary to submit to the duties
of society; and he began to respect "_the rights of things and
persons_{1}." When his new sense of right and wrong had been
sufficiently exercised at home, Mad. de Rosier ventured to expose him
to more dangerous trials abroad; she took him to a carpenter's workshop,
and though the saw, the hammer, the chisel, the plane, and the vice,
assailed him in various forms of temptation, his powers of forbearance
came off victorious.

{Footnote 1: Blackstone}

"To _bear_ and _forbear_" has been said to be the sum of manly virtue:
the virtue of forbearance in childhood must always be measured by
the pupil's disposition to activity: a vivacious boy must often have
occasion to forbear more, in a quarter of an hour, than a dull, indolent
child in a quarter of a year.

"May I touch this?"--"May I meddle with that?" were questions which our
prudent hero now failed not to ask, before he meddled with the property
of others, and he found his advantage in this mode of proceeding. He
observed that his governess was, in this respect, as scrupulous as she
required that he should be, and he consequently believed in the truth
and _general_ utility of her precepts.

The coachmaker's, the cooper's, the turner's, the cabinet-maker's, even
the black ironmonger's and noisy tinman's shop, afforded entertainment
for many a morning; a trifling gratuity often purchased much
instruction, and Mad. de Rosier always examined the countenance of
the workman before she suffered her little pupils to attack him with
questions. The eager curiosity of children is generally rather agreeable
than tormenting to tradesmen, who are not too busy to be benevolent; and
the care which Herbert took not to be troublesome pleased those to whom
he addressed himself. He was delighted, at the upholsterer's, to observe
that his little models of furniture had taught him how several things
were _put together_, and he soon learned the workmen's names for his
ideas. He readily understood the use of all that he saw, when he went to
a bookbinder's, and to a printing-office, because, in his own printing
and bookbinder's press, he had seen similar contrivances in miniature.

Prints, as well as models, were used to enlarge his ideas of visible
objects. Mad. de Rosier borrowed the Dictionnaire des Arts et des
Métiers, Buffon, and several books, which contained good prints of
animals, machines, and architecture; these provided amusement on rainy
days. At first she found it difficult to fix the attention of the
boisterous Herbert and the capricious Favoretta. Before they had half
examined one print, they wanted to turn over the leaf to see another;
but this desultory, impatient curiosity she endeavoured to cure by
steadily showing only one or two prints for each day's amusement.
Herbert, who could but just spell words of one syllable, could not
read what was written at the bottom of the prints, and he was sometimes
ashamed of applying to Favoretta for assistance;--the names that were
printed upon his little models of furniture he at length learned to
make out. The _press was obliged to stand still_ when Favoretta, or his
friend, Mad. de Rosier, were not at hand, to tell him, letter by letter,
how to spell the words that he wanted to print. He, one evening, went
up to Mad. de Rosier, and, with a resolute face, said, "I must learn to
read."

"If any body will be so good as to teach you, I suppose you mean," said
she, smiling{2}.

{Footnote 2: Vide Rousseau.}

"Will _you_ be so good?" said he: "perhaps you could teach me, though
Grace says 'tis very difficult; I'll do my best."

"Then I'll do _my_ best too," said Mad. de Rosier.

The consequences of these good resolutions were surprising to Mrs.
Grace. Master Herbert was quite changed, she observed; and she wondered
why he would never read when she took so much pains with him for an hour
every day to hear him his task. "Madame de What d'ye call her,"
added Mrs. Grace, "need not boast much of the hand she has had in the
business: for I've been by at odd times, and watched her ways, whilst
I have been dressing Miss Favoretta, and she has been hearing you your
task, Master Herbert."

"She doesn't call it my task--I hate that word."

"Well, I don't know what she calls it; for I don't pretend to be a
French governess, for my part; but I can read English, Master Herbert,
as well as another; and it's strange if I could not teach my mother
tongue better than an emigrant. What I say is, that she never takes
much pains one way or the other; for by the clock in mistress's
dressing-room, I minuted her twice, and she was five minutes at one
time, and not above seven the other. Easy earning money for
governesses, nowadays. No tasks!--no, not she!--Nothing all day long but
play--play--play, laughing and running, and walking, and going to see
all the shops and sights, and going out in the coach to bring home
radishes and tongue-grass, to be sure--and every thing in the house is
to be as she pleases, to be sure. I am sure my mistress is too good
to her, only because she was born a lady, they say. Do, pray, Master
Herbert, stand still, whilst I comb your hair, unless that's against
your new governess's commandments."

"I'll comb my own hair, Grace," said Herbert, manfully. "I don't like
one word you have been saying; though I don't mind any thing you, or any
body else, can say against _my friend_. She is my friend--and she has
taught me to read, I say, without bouncing me about, and shaking me, and
Master Herbert_ing_ me for ever. And what harm did it do the coach to
bring home my radishes? My radishes are come up, and she shall have some
of them. And I like the sights and shops she shows me;--but she does not
like that I should talk to you; therefore, I'll say no more; but good
morning to you, Grace."

Herbert, red with generous passion, rushed out of the room, and Grace,
pale with malicious rage, turned towards the other door that opened
into Mrs. Harcourt's bedchamber, for Mad. de Rosier, at this moment,
appeared.--"I thought I heard a great noise?"--"It was only Master
Herbert, ma'am, that _won't never_ stand still to have his hair
combed--and says he'll comb it for himself--I am sure I wish he would."

Mad. de Rosier saw, by the embarrassed manner and stifled choler of Mrs.
Grace, that the whole truth of the business had not been told, and she
repented her indiscretion in having left Herbert with her even for a
few minutes. She forbore, however, to question Herbert, who maintained
a _dignified_ silence upon the subject; and the same species of
silence would also become the historian upon this occasion, were it not
necessary that the character of an intriguing lady's maid should, for
the sake both of parents and children, be fully delineated.

Mrs. Grace, offended by Mad. de Rosier's success in teaching her former
pupil to read; jealous of this lady's favour with her mistress and
with the young ladies; irritated by the bold defiance of the indignant
champion who had stood forth in his _friend's_ defence, formed a
_secret_ resolution to obtain revenge. This she imparted, the very same
day, to her confidant, Mrs. Rebecca. Mrs. Rebecca was the favourite maid
of Mrs. Fanshaw, an acquaintance of Mrs. Harcourt. Grace invited Mrs.
Rebecca to drink tea with her. As soon as the preliminary ceremonies of
the tea-table had been adjusted, she proceeded to state her grievances.

"In former times, as nobody knows better than you, Mrs. Rebecca, I had
my mistress's ear, and was all in all in the house, with her and the
young ladies, and the old governess; and it was I that was to teach
Master Herbert to read; and Miss Favoretta was almost constantly from
morning to night, except when she was called for by company, with me,
and a sweet little well-dressed creature always, you know, she was."

"A sweet little creature, indeed, ma'am, and I was wondering, before you
spoke, not to see her in your room, as usual, to-night," replied Mrs.
Rebecca.

"Dear Mrs. Rebecca, you need not wonder at that, or any thing else
that's wonderful, in our present government above stairs, I'll assure
you; for we have a new French governess, and new measures. Do you know,
ma'am, the coach is ordered to go about at all hours, whenever she
pleases _for to_ take the young ladies out, and she is quite like my
mistress. But no one can bear two mistresses, you know, Mrs. Rebecca;
wherefore, I'm come to a resolution, in short, that either she or I
shall quit the house, and we shall presently see which of us it must be.
Mrs. Harcourt, at the upshot of all things, must be conscious, at the
bottom of her heart, that, if she is the elegantest dresser about town,
it's not all her own merit."

"Very true indeed, Mrs. Grace," replied her complaisant friend; "and
what sums of money her millinery might cost her, if she had no one
clever at making up things at home! You are blamed by many, let me tell
you, for doing so much as you do. Mrs. Private, the milliner, I know
from the best authority, is not your friend: now, for my part, I
think it is no bad thing to have friends _abroad_, if one comes to any
difficulties at home. Indeed, my dear, your attachment to Mrs. Harcourt
quite blinds you--but, to be sure, you know your own affairs best."

"Why, I am not for changing when I am well," replied Grace: "Mrs.
Harcourt is abroad a great deal, and hers is, all things considered,
a very eligible house. Now, what I build my hopes upon, my dear Mrs.
Rebecca, is this--that ladies, like some people who have been beauties,
and come to _make themselves up_, and wear pearl powder, and false
auburn hair, and twenty things that are not to be advertised, you know,
don't like quarrelling with those that are in the secret--and ladies who
have never made a _rout_ about governesses and _edication_, till lately,
and now, perhaps, only for fashion's sake, would upon a pinch--don't you
think--rather part with a French governess, when there are so many,
than with a favourite maid who knows her ways, _and has_ a good taste in
dress, which so few can boast?"

"Oh, surely! surely!" said Mrs. Rebecca; and having tasted Mrs. Grace's
crême-de-noyau, it was decided that war should be declared against _the
governess_.

Mad. de Rosier, happily unconscious of the machinations of her enemies,
and even unsuspicious of having any, was, during this important
conference, employed in reading Marmontel's Silvain, with Isabella and
Matilda. They were extremely interested in this little play; and Mrs.
Harcourt, who came into the room whilst they were reading, actually
sat down on the sofa beside Isabella, and, putting her arm round her
daughter's waist, said--"Go on, love; let me have a share in some of
your pleasures--lately, whenever I see you, you all look the picture of
happiness--Go on, pray, Mad. de Rosier."

"It was I who was reading, mamma," said Isabella, pointing to the place
over Mad. de Rosier's shoulder--

     Une femme douce et sage
     A toujours tant d'avantage!
     Elle a pour elle en partage
     L'agrément, et la raison.'"

"Isabella," said Mrs. Harcourt, from whom a scarcely audible sigh
had escaped--"Isabella really reads French almost as well as she does
English."

"I am improved very much since I have heard Mad. de Rosier read," said
Isabella.

"I don't doubt _that_, in the least; you are, all of you, much improved,
I think, in every thing;--I am sure I feel very much obliged to Mad. de
Rosier."

Matilda looked pleased by this speech of her mother, and affectionately
said, "I am glad, mamma, you like her as well as we do--Oh, I forgot
that Mad, de Rosier was by--but it is not flattery, however."

"You see you have won all their hearts"--_from me_, Mrs. Harcourt was
near saying, but she paused, and, with a faint laugh, added--"yet you
see I am not jealous. Matilda! read those lines that your sister has
just read; I want to hear them again."

Mrs. Harcourt sent for her work, and spent the evening at home. Mad. de
Rosier, without effort or affectation, dissipated the slight feeling of
jealousy which she observed in the mother's mind, and directed towards
her the attention of her children, without disclaiming, however,
the praise that was justly her due. She was aware that she could not
increase her pupils' real affection for their mother, by urging them to
sentimental hypocrisy.

Whether Mrs. Harcourt understood her conduct this evening, she could not
discover--for politeness does not always speak the unqualified language
of the heart--but she trusted to the effect of time, on which persons
of integrity may always securely rely for their reward. Mrs. Harcourt
gradually discovered that, as she became more interested in the
occupations and amusements of her children, they became more and more
grateful for her sympathy; she consequently grew fonder of domestic
life, and of the person who had introduced its pleasures into her
family.

That we may not be accused of attributing any miraculous power to
our French governess, we shall explain the natural means by which she
improved her pupils.

We have already pointed out how she discouraged, in Isabella, the vain
desire to load her memory with historical and chronological facts,
merely for the purpose of ostentation. She gradually excited her to
read books of reasoning, and began with those in which reasoning and
amusement are mixed. She also endeavoured to cultivate her imagination,
by giving her a few well-chosen passages to read, from the best English,
French, and Italian poets. It was an easier task to direct the activity
of Isabella's mind, than to excite Matilda's dormant powers. Mad. de
Rosier patiently waited till she discovered something which seemed to
please Matilda more than usual. The first book that she appeared to like
particularly was, "Les Conversations d'Emilie:" one passage she read
with great delight aloud; and Mad. de Rosier, who perceived by the
manner of reading it that she completely understood the elegance of the
French, begged her to try if she could translate it into English: it was
not more than half a page. Matilda was not terrified at the length of
such an undertaking: she succeeded, and the praises that were bestowed
upon her translation excited in her mind some portion of ambition.

Mad. de Rosier took the greatest care in conversing with Matilda, to
make her feel her own powers: whenever she used good arguments,
they were immediately attended to; and when Matilda perceived that a
prodigious memory was not essential to success, she was inspired with
courage to converse unreservedly.

An accident pointed out to Mad. de Rosier another resource in Matilda's
education. One day Herbert called his sister Matilda to look at an ant,
which was trying to crawl up a stick; he seemed scarcely able to carry
his large white load in his little forceps, and he frequently fell back,
when he had just reached the top of the stick. Mad. de Rosier, who
knew how much of the art of instruction depends upon seizing the proper
moments to introduce new ideas, asked Herbert whether he had ever heard
of the poor snail, who, like this ant, slipped back continually, as he
was endeavouring to climb a wall twenty feet high.

"I never heard of that snail; pray tell me the story," cried Herbert.

"It is not a story--it is a question in arithmetic," replied Mad. de
Rosier. "This snail was to crawl up a wall twenty feet high; he crawled
up five feet every day, and slipped back again four feet every night: in
how many days did he reach the top of the wall?"

"I love questions in arithmetic," exclaimed Matilda, "when they are
not too difficult!" and immediately she whispered to Mad. de Rosier the
answer to this easy question.

Her exclamation was not lost;--Mad. de Rosier determined to cultivate
her talents for arithmetic. Without fatiguing Matilda's attention by
long exercises in the common rules, she gave her questions which obliged
her to _think_, and which excited her to reason and to invent; she
gradually explained to her pupil the relations of numbers, and gave her
rather more clear ideas of the nature and use of the common rules of
arithmetic than she had acquired from her writing-master, who had taught
them only in a technical manner. Matilda's confidence in herself was
thus increased. When she had answered a difficult question, she could
not doubt that she had succeeded; this was not a matter that admitted
of the uncertainty which alarms timid tempers. Mad. de Rosier began
by asking her young arithmetician questions only when they were by
themselves--but by and by she appealed to her before the rest of the
family. Matilda coloured at first, and looked as if she knew nothing of
the business; but a distinct answer was given at last, and Isabella's
opinions of her sister's abilities rose with amazing rapidity, when she
heard that Matilda understood decimal fractions.

"Now, my dear Matilda," said Mad. de Rosier, "since you understand
what even Isabella thinks difficult, you will, I hope, have sufficient
confidence in yourself to attempt things which Isabella does not think
difficult."

Matilda shook her head--"I am not Isabella yet," said she.

"No!" cried Isabella, with generous, sincere warmth; "but you are
much superior to Isabella: I am certain that I could not answer those
difficult questions, though you think me so quick--and, when once
you have learned any thing, you never forget it; the ideas are not
superficial," continued Isabella, turning to Mad. de Rosier; "they have
depth, like the pins in mosaic work."

Mad. de Rosier smiled at this allusion, and, encouraged by her smile,
Isabella's active imagination immediately produced another simile.

"I did not know my sister's abilities till lately--till you drew them
out, Mad. de Rosier, like your drawing upon the screen in sympathetic
inks;--when you first produced it, I looked, and said there was nothing;
and when I looked again, after you had held it to the fire for a few
moments, beautiful colours and figures appeared."

Mad. de Rosier, without using any artifice, succeeded in making Isabella
and Matilda friends, instead of rivals, by placing them, as much as
possible, in situations in which they could mutually sympathize, and by
discouraging all painful competition.

With Herbert and Favoretta she pursued a similar plan. She scarcely ever
left them alone together, that she might not run the hazard of their
quarrelling in her absence. At this age children have not sufficient
command of their tempers--they do not understand the nature of society
and of justice: the less they are left together, when they are of
unequal strength, and _when they have not any employments in which they
are mutually interested_, the better. Favoretta and Herbert's petty, but
loud and violent disputes, had nearly ceased since these precautions had
been regularly attended to. As they had a great deal of amusement in
the few hours which they spent together, they grew fond of each other's
company: when Herbert was out in his little garden, he was impatient for
the time when Favoretta was to come to visit his works; and
Favoretta had equal pleasure in exhibiting to her brother her various
manufactures.

Mad. de Rosier used to hear them read in Mrs. Barbauld's excellent
little books, and in "Evenings at Home;" she generally told them some
interesting story when they had finished reading, and they regularly
seated themselves, side by side, on the carpet, opposite to her.

One day Herbert established himself in what he called his "_happy
corner_," Favoretta placed herself close beside him, and Mad. de Rosier
read to them that part of Sandford and Merton in which Squire Chace is
represented beating Harry Sandford unmercifully because he refused to
tell which way the hare was gone. Mad. de Rosier observed that this
story made a great impression upon Herbert, and she thought it a good
opportunity, whilst his mind was warm, to point out the difference
between resolution and obstinacy. Herbert had been formerly disposed to
obstinacy; but this defect in his temper never broke out towards Mad. de
Rosier, because she carefully avoided urging him to do those things to
which she knew him to be adverse; and she frequently desired him to do
what she knew would be agreeable to him: she thought it best to suffer
him gradually to forget his former bad habits and false associations,
before she made any trial of his obedience; then she endeavoured to give
him new habits, by placing him in new situations. She now resolved to
address herself to his understanding, which she perceived had opened to
reason.

He exclaimed with admiration, upon hearing the account of Harry
Sandford's fortitude, "That's right!--that's right!--I am glad Harry
did not tell that cruel Squire Chace which way the hare was gone. I like
Harry for bearing to be beaten, _rather than speak a word when he did
not choose it_. I love Harry, don't you?" said he, appealing to Mad. de
Rosier.

"Yes, I like him very much," said Mad. de Rosier: "but not for the
reason that you have just given."

"No!" said Herbert, starting up: "why, ma'am, don't you like Harry for
saving the poor hare? don't you admire him for bearing all the hard
blows, and for saying, when the man asked him afterward why he didn't
tell which way the hare was gone, 'Because I don't choose to betray the
unfortunate?'"

"Oh! don't you love him for that?" said Favoretta, rising from her seat;
"I think Herbert himself would have given just such an answer, only
not in such good words. I wonder, Mad. de Rosier, you don't like that
answer!"

"I have never said that I did not like that answer," said Mad. de
Rosier, as soon as she was permitted to speak.

"Then you _do_ like it? then you do like Harry?" exclaimed Herbert and
Favoretta, both at once.

"Yes, I like that answer, Herbert; I like your friend Harry for saying
that he did not choose to betray the unfortunate. You did not do _him_
justice or yourself, when you said just now that you liked Harry because
he bore to be beaten rather than speak a word when he did not _choose
it_."

Herbert looked puzzled.

"I mean," continued Mad. de Rosier, "that, before I can determine
whether I like and admire any body for persisting in doing or in not
doing any thing, I must hear their reasons for their resolution. 'I
don't choose it,' is no reason; I must hear their reasons for choosing
or not choosing it before I can judge."

"And I have told you the reason Harry gave for not choosing to speak
when he was asked, and you said it was a good one; and you like him for
his courage, don't you?" said Herbert.

"Yes," said Mad. de Rosier; "those who are resolute, when they have good
reasons for their resolution, I admire; those who persist merely because
_they choose it_, and who cannot, or will not, tell why they choose it,
I despise."

"Oh, so do I!" said Favoretta: "you know, brother, whenever you say you
don't choose it, I am always angry, and ask you why."

"And if you were not _always_ angry," said Mad. de Rosier, "perhaps
_sometimes_ your brother would tell you why."

"Yes, that I should," said Herbert; "I always have a good reason to give
Favoretta, though I don't always choose to give it."

"Then," said Mad. de Rosier, "you cannot always expect your sister to
admire the justice of your decisions."

"No," replied Herbert; "but when I don't give her a reason, 'tis
generally because it is not worth while. There can be no great wisdom,
you know, in resolutions about trifles: such as, whether she should be
my horse or I her horse, or whether I should water my radishes before
breakfast or after."

"Certainly, you are right: there can be no great wisdom in resolutions
about such trifles, therefore wise people never are obstinate about
trifles."

"Do you know," cried Herbert, after a pause, "they used, before you
came, to say that I was obstinate; but with you I have never been so,
because you know how to manage me; you manage me a great deal more
_cunningly_ than Grace used to do."

"I would not manage you more _cunningly_ than Grace used to do, if I
could," replied Mad. de Rosier; "for then I should manage you worse than
she did. It is no pleasure to me to govern you; I had much rather that
you should use your reason to govern yourself."

Herbert pulled down his waistcoat, and, drawing up his head, looked with
conscious dignity at Favoretta.

"You know," continued Mad. de Rosier, "that there are two ways of
governing people--by reason and by force. Those who have no reason, or
who do not use it, must be governed by force."

"I am not one of those," said Herbert; "for I hate force."

"But you must also love reason," said Mad. de Rosier, "if you would not
be _one of those_."

"Well, so I do, when I hear it from _you_," replied Herbert, bluntly;
"for you give me reasons that I can understand, when you ask me to do or
not to do any thing: I wish people would always do so."

"But, Herbert," said Mad. de Rosier, "you must sometimes be contented to
do as you are desired, even when I do not think it proper to give you my
reasons;--you will, hereafter, find that I have good ones."

"I have found that already in a great many things," said Herbert;
"especially about the caterpillar."

"What about the caterpillar?" said Favoretta.

"Don't you remember," said Herbert, "the day that I was going to tread
upon what I thought was a little bit of black stick, and _she_ desired
me not to do it, and I did not, and afterwards I found out that it was
a caterpillar;--ever since that day I have been more ready, you know,"
continued he, turning to Mad. de Rosier, "to believe that you might be
in the right, and to do as you bid me--you don't think me obstinate, do
you?"

"No," said Mad. de Rosier.

"No! no!--do you hear that, Favoretta?" cried Herbert joyfully: "Grace
used to say I was as obstinate as a mule, and she used to call me an
ass, too: but even poor asses are not obstinate when they are well
treated. Where is the ass, in the Cabinet of Quadrupeds, Favoretta,
which we were looking at the other day? Oh, let me read the account to
you, Mad. de Rosier. It is towards the middle of the book, Favoretta;
let me look, I can find it in a minute. It is not long--may I read it to
you?"

Mad. de Rosier consented, and Herbert read as follows:--"Much has been
said of the stupid and stubborn disposition of the ass, but we are
greatly inclined to suspect that the aspersion is ill-founded: whatever
bad qualities of this kind he may sometimes possess, they do not appear
to be the consequences of any natural defect in his constitution or
temper, but arise from the manner used in training him, and the bad
treatment he receives. We are the rather led to this assertion, from
having lately seen one which experiences a very different kind of
treatment from his master than is the fate of the generality of asses.
The humane owner of this individual is an old man, whose employment is
the selling of vegetables, which he conveys from door to door on
the back of his ass. He is constantly baiting the poor creature with
handfuls of hay, pieces of bread, or greens, which he procures in his
progress. It is with pleasure we relate, for we have often curiously
observed the old man's demeanour towards his ass, that he seldom carries
any instrument of incitement with him, nor did we ever see him lift his
hand to drive it on.

"Upon our observing to him that he seemed to be very kind to his ass,
and inquiring whether he were apt to be stubborn, how long he had had
him, &c., he replied, 'Ah, master, it is no use to be cruel, and as for
stubbornness, I cannot complain, for he is ready to do any thing, and
will go any where; I bred him myself, and have had him these two years:
he is sometimes skittish and playful, and once ran away from me: you
will hardly believe it, but there were more than fifty people after him
to stop him, and they were not able to effect it, yet he turned back of
himself, and never stopped till he run his head kindly into my breast.'

"The countenance of this individual is open, lively, and cheerful;
his pace nimble and regular; and the only inducement used to make him
increase his speed is that of calling him by name, which he readily
obeys."

"I am not an ass," said Herbert, laughing, as he finished this sentence,
"but I think Mad. de Rosier is very like the good old man, and I always
obey whenever she speaks to me. By the by," continued Herbert, who now
seemed eager to recollect something by which he could show his readiness
to obey--"by the by, Grace told me that my mother desired I should go to
her, and have my hair combed every day; now I don't like it, but I will
do it, because mamma desires it, and I will go this instant; will
you come and see how still I can stand? I will show you that I am not
obstinate."

Mad. de Rosier followed the little hero, to witness his triumph _over
himself_. Grace happened to be with her mistress who was dressing.

"Mamma, I am come to do as you bid me," cried Herbert, walking stoutly
into the room: "Grace, here's the comb;" and he turned to her the
tangled locks at the back of his head. She pulled unmercifully, but he
stood without moving a muscle of his countenance.

Mrs. Harcourt, who saw in her looking-glass what was passing, turned
round, and said, "Gently, gently, Grace; indeed, Grace, you do pull that
poor boy's hair as if you thought that his head had no feeling; I am
sure, if you were to pull my hair in that manner, I could not bear it so
well."

"Your hair!--Oh, dear ma'am, that's quite another thing--but Master
Herbert's is always in such a tangle, there's no such thing as managing
it." Again Mrs. Grace gave a desperate pull: Herbert bore it, looked up
at Mad. de Rosier, and said, "Now, that was resolution, not obstinacy,
you know."

"Here is your little obedient and patient boy," said Mad. de Rosier,
leading Herbert to his mother, "who deserves to be rewarded with a kiss
from you."

"That he shall have," said Mrs. Harcourt; "but why does Grace pull your
hair so hard? and are not you almost able to comb your own hair?"

"Able! that I am. Oh, mother, I wish I might do it for myself."

"And has Mad. de Rosier any objection to it?" said Mrs. Harcourt.

"None in the least," said Mad. de Rosier; "on the contrary, I wish that
he should do every thing that he can do for himself; but he told me that
it was your desire that he should apply to Mrs. Grace, and I was pleased
to see his ready obedience to your wishes: you may be very certain that,
even in the slightest trifles, as well as in matters of consequence, it
is _our_ wish, as much as it is our duty, to do exactly as you desire."

"My dear madame," said Mrs. Harcourt, laying her hand upon Mad. de
Rosier's, with an expression of real kindness, mixed with her habitual
politeness, "I am sensible of your goodness, but you know that in the
slightest trifles, as well as in matters of consequence, I leave every
thing implicitly to your better judgment: as to this business between
Herbert and Grace, I don't understand it."

"Mother--" said Herbert.

"Madam," said Grace, pushing forward, but not very well knowing what
she intended to say, "if you recollect, you desired me to comb Master
Herbert's hair, ma'am, and I told Master Herbert so, ma'am, that's all."

"I do not recollect any thing about it, indeed, Grace."

"Oh dear, ma'am! don't you recollect the last day there was company, and
Master Herbert came to the top of the stairs, and you was looking at
the _organ's_ lamp, I said, 'Dear! Master Herbert's hair's as rough as
a porcupine's;' and you said directly, ma'am, if you recollect, 'I wish
you would make that boy's hair fit to be seen;' those _was_ your very
words, ma'am, and I thought you meant always, ma'am."

"You mistook me, Grace," said Mrs. Harcourt, smiling at her maid's eager
volubility: "in future, you understand, that Herbert is to be entire
master of his own hair."

"Thank you, mother," said Herbert.

"Nay, my dear Herbert, thank Mad. de Rosier: I only speak in her name.
You understand, _I am sure_, Grace, now," said Mrs. Harcourt, calling
to her maid, who seemed to be in haste to quit the room--"you, I hope,
understand, Grace, that Mad. de Rosier and I are always of one mind
about the children; therefore you need never be puzzled by contradictory
orders--hers are to be obeyed."

Mrs. Harcourt was so much pleased when she looked at Herbert, as she
concluded this sentence, to see an expression of great affection and
gratitude, that she stooped instantly to kiss him.

"Another kiss! two kisses to-day from my mother, and one of her own
accord!" exclaimed Herbert joyfully, running out of the room to tell the
news to Favoretta.

"That boy has a heart," said Mrs. Harcourt, with some emotion; "you have
found it out for me, Mad. de Rosier, and I thank you."

Mad. de Rosier seized the propitious moment to present a card of
invitation, which Herbert, with much labour, had printed with his little
printing-press.

"What have we here?" said Mrs. Harcourt, and she read aloud--

'Mr. Herbert Harcourt's love to his dear mother, and, if she be not
engaged this evening, he should be exceedingly glad of her company, to
meet Isabella, Matilda, Favoretta, and Mad. de Rosier, who have promised
to sup with him upon his own radishes to-night. They are all very
impatient for _your_ answer.'"

"My answer they shall have in an instant," said Mrs. Harcourt:--"why,
Mad. de Rosier, this is the boy who could neither read nor spell six
months ago. Will you be my messenger?" added she, putting a card into
Mad. de Rosier's hand, which she had written with rapidity:--

"Mrs. Harcourt's love to her dear little Herbert; if she had a hundred
other invitations, she would accept of his."

"Bless me!" said Mrs. Grace, when she found the feathers, which she had
placed with so much skill in her mistress's hair, lying upon the table
half an hour afterward--"why, I thought my mistress was going out!"

Grace's surprise deprived her even of the power of exclamation, when she
learned that her mistress stayed at home to sup with Master Herbert upon
radishes. At night she listened with malignant curiosity, as she sat
at work in her mistress's dressing-room, to the frequent bursts of
laughter, and to the happy little voices of the festive company who were
at supper in an adjoining apartment.

"This will never do!" thought Grace; but presently the laughter ceased,
and listening attentively, she heard the voice of one of _the young
ladies_ reading. "Oh ho!" thought Grace, "if it comes to reading, Master
Herbert will soon be asleep."--But though it had _come to reading_,
Herbert was, at this instant, broad awake.

At supper, when the radishes were distributed, Favoretta was very
impatient to taste them; the first which she tasted was _hot_, she said,
and she did not quite like it.

"_Hot_!" cried Herbert, who criticized her language, in return for
her criticism upon his radishes, "I don't think you can call a radish
_hot_--it is cold, I think: I know what is meant by tasting sweet, or
sour, or bitter."

"Well," interrupted Favoretta, "what is the name for the taste of this
radish which bites my tongue?"

"_Pungent_," said Isabella, and she eagerly produced a quotation in
support of her epithet--

"'And _pungent_ radish biting infant's tongue.'"

"I know for once," said Matilda, smiling, "where you met with that line,
I believe: is it not in Shenstone's Schoolmistress, in the description
of the old woman's neat little garden?"

"Oh! I should like to hear about that old woman's neat little garden,"
cried Herbert.

"And so should I," said Mrs. Harcourt and Mad. de Rosier. Isabella
quickly produced the book after supper, and read the poem.

Herbert and Favoretta liked the old woman and her garden, and they were
much interested for the little boy, who was whipped for having been
gazing at the pictures on the horn-book, instead of learning his lesson;
but, to Isabella's great mortification, they did not understand above
half of what she read--the old English expressions puzzled them.

"You would not be surprised at this, my dear Isabella," said Mad. de
Rosier, "if you had made as many experiments upon children as I have. It
is quite a new language to them; and what you have just been reading is
scarcely intelligible to me, though you compliment me so much upon my
knowledge of the English language." Mad. de Rosier took the book,
and pointed to several words which she had not understood--such as
"eftsoons," "_Dan_ Phoebus," and "_ne_ and _y_," which had made many
lines incomprehensible.

Herbert, when he heard Mad. de Rosier confess her ignorance, began to
take courage, and came forward with his confessions.

"_Gingerbread y rare_," he thought, was some particular kind of
gingerbread; and "_Apples with cabbage net y covered o'er_" presented no
delightful image to his mind, because, as he said, he did not know what
the word _netycovered_ could mean.

These mistakes occasioned some laughter; but as Herbert perceived that
he was no longer thought stupid, he took all the laughter with good
humour, and he determined to follow, in future, Mad. de Rosier's
example, in pointing out the words which were puzzling.

Grace was astonished, at the conclusion of the evening, to find Master
Herbert in such high spirits. The next day she heard sounds of woe,
sounds agreeable to her wishes--Favoretta crying upon the stairs. It had
been a rainy morning: Favoretta and Herbert had been disappointed in
not being able to walk out; and after having been amused the preceding
evening, they were less disposed to bear disappointment, and less
inclined to employ themselves than usual. Favoretta had finished her
little basket, and her mother had promised that it should appear at the
dessert; but it wanted some hours of dinner-time; and between the
making and the performance of a promise, how long the time appears to an
impatient child! how many events happen which may change the mind of the
promiser!

Mad. de Rosier had lent Favoretta and Herbert, for their amusement,
the first number of "The Cabinet of Quadrupeds," in which there are
beautiful prints; but, unfortunately, some dispute arose between
the children. Favoretta thought her brother looked too long at the
hunchbacked camel; he accused her of turning over leaves before she had
half seen the prints; but she listened not to his just reproaches, for
she had caught a glimpse of the royal tiger springing upon Mr. Munro,
and she could no longer restrain her impatience. Each party began
to pull at the book; and the camel and the royal tiger were both in
imminent danger of being torn in pieces, when Mad. de Rosier interfered,
parted the combatants, and sent them into separate rooms, as it was her
custom to do, whenever they could not agree together.

Grace, the moment she heard Favoretta crying, went up to the room where
she was, and made her tiptoe approaches, addressing Favoretta in a
tone of compassion, which, to a child's unpractised ear, might appear,
perhaps, the natural voice of sympathy. The sobbing child hid her face
in Grace's lap; and when she had told her complaint against Mad. de
Rosier, Grace comforted her for the loss of the royal tiger by the
present of a queen-cake. Grace did not dare to stay long in the room,
lest Mad. de Rosier should detect her; she therefore left the little
girl, with a strict charge "not to say a word of the queen-cake to her
governess."

Favoretta kept the queen-cake, that she might divide it with Herbert;
for she now recollected that she had been most to blame in the dispute
about the prints. Herbert absolutely refused, however, to have any share
of the cake, and he strongly urged his sister to return it to Grace.

Herbert had, _formerly_, to use his own expression, been accused of
being fond of eating, and so, perhaps, he was; but since he had acquired
other pleasures, those of affection and employment, his love of eating
had diminished so much, that he had eaten only one of his own radishes,
because he felt more pleasure in distributing the rest to his mother and
sisters.

It was with some difficulty that he prevailed upon Favoretta to restore
the queen-cake: the arguments that he used we shall not detail, but he
concluded with promising, that, if Favoretta would return the cake, he
would ask Mad. de Rosier, the next time they passed by the pastrycook's
shop, to give them some queen-cakes--"and I dare say she will give us
some, for she is much more _really_ good-natured than Grace."

Favoretta, with this hope of a future queen-cake, in addition to all
her brother's arguments, at last determined to return Grace's
present--"Herbert says I had better give it you back again," said she,
"because Mad. de Rosier does not know it."

Grace was somewhat surprised by the effect of Herbert's oratory, and
she saw that she must change her ground. The next day, when the children
were walking with Mad. de Rosier by a pastrycook's shop, Herbert, with
an honest countenance, asked Mad. de Rosier to give Favoretta and him a
queen-cake. She complied, for she was glad to find that he always asked
frankly for what he wanted; and yet that he bore refusals with good
humour.

Just as Herbert was going to eat his queen-cake, he heard the sound of
music in the street; he went to the door, and saw a poor man who was
playing on the dulcimer--a little boy was with him, who looked extremely
thin and hungry--he asked Herbert for some halfpence.

"I have no money of my own," said Herbert, "but I can give you this,
which is my own."

Mad. de Rosier held his hand back, which he had just stretched out to
offer his queen-cake; she advised him to exchange it for something
more substantial; she told him that he might have two buns for one
queen-cake. He immediately changed it for two buns, and gave them to
the little boy, who thanked him heartily. The man who was playing on the
dulcimer asked where Herbert lived, and promised to stop at his door to
play a tune for him, which he seemed to like particularly.

Convinced by the affair of the queen-cake that Herbert's influence was
a matter of some consequence in the family, Mrs. Grace began to repent
that she had made him her enemy, and she resolved, upon the first
convenient occasion, to make him overtures of peace--overtures which,
she had no doubt, would be readily accepted.

One morning she heard him sighing and groaning, as she thought, over
some difficult sum, which Mad. de Rosier had set for him; he cast up one
row aloud several times, but could not bring the total twice to the same
thing. When he took his sum to Mad. de Rosier, who was dressing, he
was kept waiting a few minutes at the door, because Favoretta was not
dressed. The young gentleman became a little impatient, and when he
gained admittance his sum was wrong.

"Then I cannot make it right," said Herbert, passionately.

"Try," said Mad. de Rosier; "go into that closet by yourself, and try
once more, and perhaps you will find that you _can_ make it right."

Herbert knelt down in the closet, though rather unwillingly, to this
provoking sum.

"Master Herbert, my dear," said Mrs. Grace, following him, "will you be
so good as to go for Miss Favoretta's scissors, if you please, which she
lent you yesterday?--she wants 'em, my dear."

Herbert, surprised by the unusually good-natured tone of this request,
ran for the scissors, and at his return, found that his difficult sum
had been cast up in his absence; the total was written at the bottom
of it, and he read these words, which he knew to be Mrs. Grace's
writing--"Rub out my _figurs_, and write them in your own." Herbert
immediately rubbed out Mrs. Grace's figures with indignation, and
determined to do the sum for himself. He carried it to Mad. de
Rosier--it was wrong: Grace stared, and when she saw Herbert patiently
stand beside Mad. de Rosier and repeat his efforts, she gave up all idea
of obtaining any influence over him.

"Mad. de Rosier," said she to herself, "has bewitched 'em all; I think
it's odd one can't find out her art!"

Mrs. Grace seemed to think that she could catch the knack of educating
children, as she had surreptitiously learnt, from a fashionable
hairdresser, the art of dressing hair. Ever since Mrs. Harcourt had
spoken in such a decided manner respecting Mad. de Rosier, her maid had
artfully maintained the greatest appearance of respect for that lady, in
her mistress's presence, and had even been scrupulous, to a troublesome
extreme, in obeying _the governess's orders_; and by a studied show of
attachment to Mrs. Harcourt, and much alacrity at her toilette, she had,
as she flattered herself, secured a fresh portion of favour.

One morning Mrs. Harcourt found, when she awoke, that she had a
headache, and a slight feverish complaint. She had caught cold the night
before in coming out of a warm assembly-room. Mrs. Grace affected to
be much alarmed at her mistress's indisposition, and urged her to send
immediately for Dr. X----. To this Mrs. Harcourt half consented, and a
messenger was sent for him. In the meantime Mrs. Harcourt, who had been
used to be much attended to in her slight indispositions, expressed some
surprise that Mad. de Rosier, or some of her children, when they heard
that she was ill, had not come to see her.

"Where is Isabella? where is Matilda? or Favoretta? what is become of
them all? do they know I am ill, Grace?"

"Oh dear! yes, ma'am; but they're all gone out in the coach, with Mad.
de Rosier."

"All?" said Mrs. Harcourt.

"All, I believe, ma'am," said Grace; "though, indeed, I can't pretend to
be sure, since I make it my business not to scrutinize, and to know as
little as possible of what's going on in the house, lest I should seem
to be too particular."

"Did Mad. de Rosier leave any message for me before she went out?"

"Not with me, ma'am."

Here the prevaricating waiting-maid told barely the truth in words: Mad.
de Rosier had left a message with the footman in Grace's hearing.

"I hope, ma'am," continued Grace, "you weren't disturbed with the noise
in the house early this morning?"

"What noise?--I heard no noise," said Mrs. Harcourt.

"No noise! dear ma'am, I'm as glad as can possibly be of that, at any
rate; but to be sure there was a great racket. I was really afraid,
ma'am, it would do no good to your poor head."

"What was the matter?" said Mrs. Harcourt, drawing back the curtain.

"Oh! nothing, ma'am, that need alarm you--only music and dancing."

"Music and dancing so early in the morning!--Do, Grace, say all you have
to say at once, for you keep me in suspense, which, I am sure, is not
good for my head."

"La, ma'am, I was so afraid it would make you angry, ma'am--that was
what made me so backward in mentioning it; but, to be sure, Mad. de
Rosier, and the young ladies, and Master Herbert, I suppose, thought you
couldn't hear, because it was in the back parlour, ma'am."

"Hear what? what was in the back parlour?"

"Only a dulcimer man, ma'am, playing for the young ladies."

"Did you tell them I was ill, Grace?"

It was the second time Mrs. Harcourt had asked this question. Grace was
gratified by this symptom.

"Indeed, ma'am," she replied, "I did make bold to tell Master Herbert,
that I was afraid you would hear him jumping and making such an uproar
up and down the stairs; but to be sure, I did not say a word to the
young ladies--as Mad. de Rosier was by, I thought she knew best."

A gentle knock at the door interrupted Mrs. Grace's charitable
animadversions.

"Bless me, if it isn't the young ladies! I'm sure I thought they were
gone out in the coach."

As Isabella and Matilda came up to the side of their mother's bed, she
said, in a languid voice--

"I hope, Matilda, my dear, you did not stay at home on my account--Is
Isabella there? What book has she in her hand?"

"Zeluco, mamma--I thought, perhaps, you would like to hear some more of
it--you liked what I read to you the other day."

"But you forget that I have a terrible headache--Pray don't let me
detain either of you, if you have any thing to do for Mad. de Rosier."

"Nothing in the world, mamma," said Matilda; "she is gone to take
Herbert and Favoretta to Exeter Change."

No farther explanation could take place, for, at this instant,
Mrs. Grace introduced Dr. X----. Now Dr. X---- was not one of those
complaisant physicians who flatter ladies that they are very ill when
they have any desire to excite tender alarm.

After satisfying himself that his patient was not quite so ill as Mrs.
Grace had affected to believe, Dr. X---- insensibly led from medical
inquiries to general conversation: he had much playful wit and knowledge
of the human heart, mixed with a variety of information, so that he
could with happy facility amuse and interest nervous patients, who were
beyond the power of the solemn apothecary.

The doctor drew the young ladies into conversation by rallying Isabella
upon her simplicity in reading a novel openly in her mother's presence;
he observed that she did not follow the example of the famous Serena, in
"The Triumphs of Temper." "Zeluco!" he exclaimed, in an ironical tone
of disdain: "why not the charming 'Sorrows of Werter,' or some of our
fashionable hobgoblin romances?"

Isabella undertook the defence of her book with much enthusiasm--and
either her cause, or her defence, was so much to Dr. X.----'s taste,
that he gradually gave up his feigned attack.

After the argument was over, and every body, not excepting Mrs.
Harcourt, who had almost forgotten her headache, was pleased with the
vanquished doctor, he drew from his pocket-book three or four small
cards; they were tickets of admittance to Lady N----'s French reading
parties.

Lady N---- was an elderly lady, whose rank made literature fashionable
amongst many, who aspired to the honour of being noticed by her. She was
esteemed such an excellent judge of manners, abilities, and character,
that her approbation was anxiously courted, more especially by mothers
who were just introducing their daughters into the world. She was
fond of encouraging youthful merit; but she was nice, some thought
fastidious, in the choice of her young acquaintance.

Mrs. Harcourt had been very desirous that Isabella and Matilda should
be early distinguished by a person, whose approving voice was of so much
consequence in fashionable as well as in literary society; and she was
highly flattered by Dr. X----'s prophecy, that Isabella would be a great
favourite of this "nice judging" lady--"Provided," added he, turning to
Isabella, "you have the prudence not to be always, as you have been this
morning, victorious in argument."

"I think," said Mrs. Harcourt--after the doctor had taken his leave--"I
think I am much better--ring for Grace, and I will get up."

"Mamma," said Matilda, "if you will give me leave, I will give my ticket
for the reading party to Mad. de Rosier, because, I am sure, it is an
entertainment she will like particularly--and, you know, she confines
herself so much with us--"

"I do not wish her to confine herself _so_ much, my dear, I am
sure," said Mrs. Harcourt, coldly, for, at this instant, Grace's
representations of the morning's music and dancing, and some remains of
her former jealousy of Mad. de Rosier's influence over her children's
affections, operated upon her mind. Pride prevented her from explaining
herself further to Isabella or Matilda--and though they saw that she was
displeased, they had no idea of the reason. As she was dressing, Mrs.
Harcourt conversed with them about the books they were reading. Matilda
was reading Hogarth's Analysis of Beauty; and she gave a distinct
account of his theory.

Mrs. Harcourt, when she perceived her daughter's rapid improvement, felt
a mixture of joy and sorrow.

"My dears," said she, "you will all of you be much superior to your
mother--but girls were educated, in my days, quite in a different style
from what they are now."

"Ah! there were no Mad. de Rosiers then," said Matilda, innocently.

"What sort of a woman was your mother, mamma?" said Isabella, "my
grandmother, mamma?"

"She--she was a very good woman."

"Was she sensible?" said Isabella.

"Matilda, my dear," said Mrs. Harcourt, "I wish you would see if Mad.
de Rosier has returned--I should be very glad to speak with her, for one
moment, if she be not engaged."

Under the veil of politeness, Mrs. Harcourt concealed her real feelings,
and declaring to Mad. de Rosier that she did not feel in spirits, or
sufficiently well, to go out that evening, she requested that Mad. de
Rosier would go, in her stead, to a dinner, where she knew her company
would be particularly acceptable.--"You will trust me, will you, with
your pupils for one evening?" added Mrs. Harcourt.

The tone and manner in which she pronounced these words revealed the
real state of her mind to Mad. de Rosier, who immediately complied with
her wishes.

Conscious of this lady's quick penetration, Mrs. Harcourt was abashed
by this ready compliance, and she blamed herself for feelings which she
could not suppress.

"I am sorry that you were not at home this morning," she continued, in a
hurried manner--"you would have been delighted with Dr. X----; he is one
of the most entertaining men I am acquainted with--and you would have
been vastly proud of your pupil there," pointing to Isabella; "I assure
you, she pleased me extremely."

In the evening, after Mad. de Rosier's departure, Mrs. Harcourt was not
quite so happy as she had expected. They who have only seen children
in picturesque situations, are not aware how much the duration of this
domestic happiness depends upon those who have the care of them. People
who, with the greatest abilities and the most anxious affection, are
unexperienced in education, should not be surprised or mortified if
their first attempts be not attended with success. Mrs. Harcourt thought
that she was doing what was very useful in hearing Herbert read; he
read with tolerable fluency, but he stopped at the end of almost every
sentence to weigh the exact sense of the words. In this habit he had
been indulged, or rather encouraged, by his preceptress; but his simple
questions, and his desire to have every word precisely explained, were
far from amusing to one who was little accustomed to the difficulties
and misapprehensions of a young reader.

Herbert was reading a passage, which Mad. de Rosier had marked for him,
in Xenophon's Cyropaedia. With her explanations, it might have been
intelligible to him. Herbert read the account of Cyrus's judgment upon
the two boys, who had quarrelled about their great and little coats,
much to his mother's satisfaction, because he had understood every word
of it, except the word _constituted_.

"_Constituted judge_--what does that mean, mamma?"

"Made a judge, my dear: go on."

"I saw a judge once, mamma, in a great wig--had Cyrus a wig, when he was
con--const!--made a judge?"

Isabella and Mrs. Harcourt laughed at this question; and they
endeavoured to explain the difference between a Persian and an English
judge.

Herbert with some difficulty separated the ideas, which he had so firmly
associated, of a judge and a great wig; and when he had, or thought
he had, an abstract notion of a judge, he obeyed his mother's repeated
injunctions of "Go on--go on." He went on, after observing that what
came next was not marked by Mad. de Rosier for him to read.

Cyrus's mother says to him: _"Child, the same things are not accounted
just with your grandfather here, and yonder in Persia."_ At this
sentence Herbert made a dead stop; and, after pondering for some time,
said, "I don't understand what Cyrus's mother meant--what does she mean
by _accounted just_?--_Accounted_, Matilda, I thought meant only about
casting up sums?"

"It has another meaning, my dear," Matilda mildly began.

"Oh, for Heaven's sake, spare me!" exclaimed Mrs. Harcourt; "do not
let me hear all the meanings of all the words in the English language.
Herbert may look for the words that he does not understand, in the
dictionary, when he has done reading. Go on, now, pray; for," added she,
looking at her watch, "you have been half an hour reading half a page:
this would tire the patience of Job."

Herbert, perceiving that his mother was displeased, began in the same
instant to be frightened; he hurried on as fast as he could, without
understanding one word more of what he was reading; his precipitation
was worse than his slowness: he stumbled over the words, missed
syllables, missed lines, made the most incomprehensible nonsense of the
whole; till, at length, Mrs. Harcourt shut the book in despair, and soon
afterward despatched Herbert, who was also in despair, to bed. At this
catastrophe, Favoretta looked very grave, and a general gloom seemed to
overspread the company.

Mrs. Harcourt was mortified at the silence that prevailed, and made
several ineffectual attempts to revive the freedom and gaiety of
conversation:--"Ah!" said she to herself, "I knew it would be so;--they
cannot be happy without Mad. de Rosier."

Isabella had taken up a book. "Cannot you read for our entertainment,
Isabella, my dear, as well as for your own?" said her mother: "I assure
you, I am as much interested always in what you read to me, as Mad. de
Rosier herself can be."

"I was just looking, mamma, for some lines, that we read the other day,
which Mad. de Rosier said she was sure you would like. Can you find
them, Matilda? You know Mad. de Rosier said that mamma would like them,
because she has been at the opera."

"I have been at a great many operas," said Mrs. Harcourt, dryly; "but I
like other things as well as operas--and I cannot precisely guess what
you mean by _the_ opera--has it no name?"

"Medea and Jason, ma'am."

"The _ballet_ of Medea and Jason. It's a very fine thing, certainly; but
one has seen it so often. Read on, my dear."

Isabella then read a passage, which, notwithstanding Mrs. Harcourt's
inclination to be displeased, captivated her ear, and seized her
imagination.

     "Slow out of earth, before the festive crowds,
     On wheels of fire, amid a night of clouds,
     Drawn by fierce fiends, arose a magic car,
     Received the queen, and, hov'ring, flamed in air.
     As with raised hands the suppliant traitors kneel,
     And fear the vengeance they deserved to feel;
     "Thrice, with parch'd lips, her guiltless babes she press'd,
     And thrice she clasp'd them to her tortured breast.
     Awhile with white uplifted eyes she stood,
     Then plunged her trembling poniards in their blood.
     Go, kiss your sire! go, share the bridal mirth!
     She cried, and hurl'd their quiv'ring limbs on earth.
     Rebellowing thunders rock the marble tow'rs,
     And red-tongucd lightnings shoot their arrowy show'rs:
     Earth yawns!--the crashing ruin sinks!--o'er all
     Death with black hands extends his mighty pall."

"They are admirable lines, indeed!" exclaimed Mrs. Harcourt.

"I knew, mamma, you would like them," said Isabella; "and I'm sure I
wish I had seen the ballet too."

"You were never at an opera," said Mrs. Harcourt, after Isabella had
finished reading; "should you, either of you, or both, like to go with
me to-night to the opera?"

"To-night, ma'am!" cried Isabella, in a voice of joy.

"To-night, mamma!" cried Matilda, timidly; "but you were not well this
morning."

"But I am very well, now, my love; at least quite well enough to go
out with you--let me give you some pleasure. Ring for Grace, my dear
Matilda," added Mrs. Harcourt, looking at her watch, "and do not let us
be sentimental, for we have not a moment to lose--we must prevail upon
Grace to be as quick as lightning in her operations."

Grace was well disposed to be quick--she was delighted with what she
called _the change of measures_;--she repeated continually, in the midst
of their hurried toilette--

"Well, I am so glad, young ladies, you're going out with your _mamma_,
at last--I never saw my mistress look so well as she does to-night."

Triumphant, and feeling herself to be a person of consequence, Grace was
indefatigably busy, and Mrs. Harcourt thought that her talkative zeal
was the overflowing of an honest heart.

After Mrs. Harcourt, with Isabella and Matilda, were gone to the opera,
Favoretta, who had been sent to bed by her mother, because she was in
the way when they were dressing, called to Grace to beg that she would
close the shutters in her room, for the moon shone upon her bed, and she
could not go to sleep.

"I wish mamma would have let me sit up a little longer," said Favoretta,
"for I am not at all sleepy."

"You always go to bed a great deal earlier, you know, miss," said Grace,
"when your governess is at home; I would let you get up, and come down
to tea with me, for I'm just going to take my late dish of tea, to rest
myself, only I dare not let you, because--"

"Because what?"

"Because, miss, you remember how you served me about the queen-cake."

"But I do not want you to give me any queen-cake; I only want to get up
for a little while," said Favoretta.

"Then get up," said Grace: "but don't make a noise, to waken Master
Herbert."

"Do you think," said Favoretta, "that Herbert would think it wrong?"

"Indeed, I don't think at all about what he thinks," said Mrs. Grace,
tossing back her head, as she adjusted her dress at the glass; "and, if
you think so much about it, you'd better lie down again."

"Oh! I can't lie down again," said Favoretta; "I have got my shoes
on--stay for me, Grace--I'm just ready."

Grace, who was pleased with an opportunity of indulging this little
girl, and who flattered herself that she should regain her former
power over Favoretta's undistinguishing affections, waited for her
most willingly. Grace drank her _late_ dish of tea in her mistress's
dressing-room, and did every thing in her power to humour "her sweet
Favoretta."

Mrs. Rebecca, Mrs. Fanshaw's maid, was summoned; she lived in the next
street. She was quite overjoyed, she said, at entering the room, to see
Miss Favoretta--it was an age since she had a sight or a glimpse of her.

We pass over the edifying conversation of those two ladies--Miss
Favoretta was kept awake, and in such high spirits by flattery, that she
did not perceive how late it was--she begged to stay up a little longer,
and a little longer.

Mrs. Rebecca joined in these entreaties, and Mrs. Grace could not refuse
them; especially as she knew that the coach would not go for Mad. de
Rosier till after her mistress's return from the opera.

The coachman had made this arrangement for his own convenience, and had
placed it entirely to the account of his horses.

Mrs. Grace depended, rather imprudently, upon the coachman's
arrangement; for Mad. de Rosier, finding that the coach did not call for
her at the hour she had appointed, sent for a chair, and returned home,
whilst Grace, Mrs. Rebecca, and Favoretta, were yet in Mrs. Harcourt's
dressing-room.

Favoretta was making a great noise, so that they did not hear the knock
at the door.

One of the housemaids apprised Mrs. Grace of Mad. de Rosier's arrival.
"She's getting out of her chair, Mrs. Grace, in the hall."

Grace started up, put Favoretta into a little closet, and charged her
not to make the least noise _for her life_.--Then, with a candle in her
hand, and a treacherous smile upon her countenance, she sallied forth
to the head of the stairs, to light Mad. de Rosier.--"Dear ma'am! my
mistress will be _so_ sorry the coach didn't go for you in time;--she
found herself better after you went--and the two young ladies are gone
with her to the opera."

"And where are Herbert and Favoretta?"

"In bed, ma'am, and asleep, hours ago.--Shall I light you, ma'am, this
way, to your room?"

"No," said Mad. de Rosier; "I have a letter to write: and I'll wait in
Mrs. Harcourt's dressing-room till she comes home."

"Very well, ma'am. Mrs. Rebecca, it's only Mad. de Rosier.--Mad. de
Rosier, it's only Rebecca, Mrs. Fanshaw's maid, ma'am, who's here very
often when my mistress is at home, and just stepped out to look at the
young ladies' drawings, which my mistress gave me leave to show her the
first time she drank tea with me, ma'am."

Mad. de Rosier, who thought all this did not concern her in the least,
listened to it with cold indifference, and sat down to write her letter.

Grace fidgeted about the room, as long as she could find any pretence
for moving any thing into or out of its place; and, at length, in no
small degree of anxiety for the prisoner she had left in the closet,
quitted the dressing-room.

As Mad. de Rosier was writing, she once or twice thought that she heard
some noise in the closet; she listened, but all was silent; and she
continued to write, till Mrs. Harcourt, Isabella, and Matilda, came
home.

Isabella was in high spirits, and began to talk, with considerable
volubility, to Mad. de Rosier about the opera.

Mrs. Harcourt was full of apologies about the coach; and Matilda rather
anxious to discover what it was that had made a change in her mother's
manner towards Mad. de Rosier.

Grace, glad to see that they were all intent upon their own affairs,
lighted their candles expeditiously, and stood waiting, in hopes that
they would immediately leave the room, and that she should be able to
release her prisoner.

Favoretta usually slept in a little closet within Mrs. Grace's room, so
that she foresaw no difficulty in getting her to bed.

"I heard!--did not _you_ hear a noise, Isabella?" said Matilda.

"A noise!--No; where?" said Isabella, and went on talking alternately
to her mother and Mad. de Rosier, whom she held fast, though they seemed
somewhat inclined to retire to rest.

"Indeed," said Matilda, "I did hear a noise in that closet."

"Oh dear, Miss Matilda," cried Grace, getting between Matilda and the
closet, "it's nothing in life but a mouse."

"A mouse, where?" said Mrs. Harcourt.

"Nowhere, ma'am," said Grace; "only Miss Matilda was hearing noises, and
I said they must be mice."

"There, mamma! there! that was not a mouse, surely!" said Matilda. "It
was a noise louder, certainly, than any mouse could make."

"Grace is frightened," said Isabella, laughing.

Grace, indeed, looked pale and terribly frightened.

Mad. de Rosier took a candle, and walked directly to the closet.

"Ring for the men," said Mrs. Harcourt.

Matilda held back Mad. de Rosier; and Isabella, whose head was now just
recovered from the opera, rang the bell with considerable energy.

"Dear Miss Isabella, don't ring so;--dear ma'am, don't be frightened,
and I'll tell you the whole truth, ma'am," said Grace to her mistress;
"it's nothing in the world to frighten any body--it's only Miss
Favoretta, ma'am."

"Favoretta!" exclaimed every body at once, except Mad. de Rosier, who
instantly opened the closet door, but no Favoretta appeared.

"Favoretta is not here," said Mad. de Rosier.

"Then I'm undone!" exclaimed Grace; "she must have got out upon the
leads." The leads were, at this place, narrow, and very dangerous.

"Don't scream, or the child is lost," said Mad. de Rosier.

Mrs. Harcourt sank down into an arm-chair. Mad. de Rosier stopped
Isabella, who pressed into the closet.

"Don't speak, Isabella--Grace, go into the closet--call Favoretta--hear
me, quietly," said Mad. de Rosier, steadily, for Mrs. Grace was in such
confusion of mind, that she was going to call upon the child, without
waiting to hear what was said to her.--"Hear me," said Mad. de Rosier,
"or _you are_ undone--go into the closet without making any bustle--call
Favoretta, gently; she will not be frightened, when she hears only your
voice."

Grace did as she was ordered, and returned from the closet in a few
instants, with Favoretta. Grace instantly began an exculpatory speech,
but Mrs. Harcourt, though still trembling, had sufficient firmness to
say, "Leave us, Grace, and let me hear the truth from the child."

Grace left the room. Favoretta related exactly what had happened, and
said that when she heard all their voices in the dressing-room, and
when she heard Matilda say there's a noise, she was afraid of being
discovered in the closet, and had crept out through a little door, with
which she was well acquainted, that opened upon the leads.

Mrs. Harcourt now broke forth into indignant exclamations against Grace.
Mad. de Rosier gently pacified her, and hinted that it would be but just
to give her a fair hearing in the morning.

"You are always yourself! always excellent!" cried Mrs. Harcourt;
"you have saved my child--we none of us had any presence of mind, but
yourself."

"Indeed, mamma, I _did_ ring the bell, however," said Isabella.

With much difficulty those who had so much to say, submitted to Mad. de
Rosier's entreaty of "Let us talk of it in the morning." She was afraid
that Favoretta, who was present, would not draw any salutary moral from
what might be said in the first emotions of joy for her safety. Mad. de
Rosier undressed the little girl herself, and took care that she should
not be treated as a heroine just escaped from imminent danger.

The morning came, and Mrs. Grace listened, with anxious ear, for the
first sound of her mistress's bell--but no bell rang; and, when she
heard Mrs. Harcourt walking in her bedchamber, Grace augured ill of her
own fate, and foreboded the decline and fall of her empire.

"If my mistress can get up and dress herself without me, it's all over
with me," said Grace; "but I'll make one trial." Then she knocked with
her most obliging knock at her mistress's door, and presented herself
with a Magdalen face--"Can I do any thing for you, ma'am?"

"Nothing, I thank you, Grace. Send Isabella and Matilda."

Isabella and Matilda came, but Mrs. Harcourt finished dressing herself
in silence, and then said--

"Come with me, my dear girls, to Mad. de Rosier's room. I believe I had
better ask her the question that I was going to ask you. Is she up?"

"Yes, but not dressed," said Matilda; "for we have been reading to her."

"And talking to her," added Isabella; "which, you know, hinders people
very much, mamma, when they are dressing."

At Mad. de Rosier's door they found Herbert, with his slate in his hand,
and his sum ready cast up.

"May I bring this little man in with me?" said Mrs. Harcourt to Mad. de
Rosier--"Herbert, shake hands with me," continued his mother: "I believe
I was a little impatient with you and your Cyrus last night; but you
must not expect that every body should be as good to you as this lady
has been;" leading him up to Mad. de Rosier.

"Set this gentleman's heart at ease, will you?" continued she,
presenting the slate, upon which his sum was written, to Mad. de Rosier.
"He looks the picture, or rather the reality, of honesty and good humour
this morning, I think. I am sure that he has not done any thing that he
is ashamed of."

Little Herbert's countenance glowed with pleasure at receiving such
praise from his mother; but he soon checked his pride, for he discovered
Favoretta, upon whom every eye had turned, as Mrs. Harcourt concluded
her speech.

Favoretta was sitting in the furthest corner of the room, and she turned
her face to the wall when Herbert looked at her; but Herbert saw that
she was in disgrace. "Your sum is quite right, Herbert," said Mad. de
Rosier.

"Herbert, take your slate," said Matilda; and the young gentleman had at
length the politeness to relieve her outstretched arm.

"Send him out of the way," whispered Mrs. Harcourt.

"Go out of the room, Herbert, my dear," said Mad. de Rosier, who never
made use of artifices upon any occasion to get rid of children--"go out
of the room, Herbert, my dear: for we want to talk about something which
we do not wish that you should hear."

Herbert, though he was anxious to know what could be the matter with
Favoretta, instantly withdrew, saying, "Will you call me again when
you've done talking?"

"We can speak French," added Mad. de Rosier, looking at Favoretta,
"since we cannot trust that little girl in a room by herself; we must
speak in a language which she does not understand, when we have any
thing to say that we do not choose she should hear."

"After all this preparation," said Mrs. Harcourt, in French, "my
little mouse will make you laugh; it will not surprise or frighten you,
Matilda, quite so much as the mouse of last night. You must know that I
have been much disturbed by certain noises."

"More noises!" said Matilda, drawing closer, to listen.

"More noises!" said Mrs. Harcourt, laughing; "but the noises which
disturbed my repose were not heard in the dead of the night, just as the
clock struck twelve--the charming hour for being frightened out of one's
wits, Matilda: my noises were heard in broad daylight, about the time

     'When lap-dogs give themselves the rousing shake.'

Was not there music and dancing here, early yesterday morning, when I
had the headache, Isabella?"

"Yes, mamma," said Isabella: "Herbert's dulcimer-boy was here! We call
him Herbert's dulcimer-boy, because Herbert gave him two buns the other
day;--the boy and his father came from gratitude, to play a tune for
Herbert, and we all ran and asked Mad. de Rosier to let him in."

"We did not know you had the headache, mamma," said Matilda, "till after
they had played several tunes, and we heard Grace saying something to
Herbert about racketing upon the stairs--he only ran up stairs once for
my music-book; and the moment Grace spoke to him, he came to us, and
said that you were not well; then Mad. de Rosier stopped the dulcimer,
and we all left off dancing, and we were very sorry Grace had not told
us sooner that you were ill: at that time it was ten--nearly eleven
o'clock."

"Grace strangely misrepresented all this," said Mrs. Harcourt: "as she
gave her advice so late, I am sorry she gave it at all; she prevented
you and Isabella from the pleasure of going out with Mad. de Rosier."

"We prevented ourselves--Grace did not prevent us, I assure you, mamma,"
said Isabella, eagerly: "we wished to stay at home with you--Herbert and
Favoretta were only going to see the royal tiger."

"Then you did not stay at home by Mad. de Rosier's desire."

"No, indeed, madam," said Mad. de Rosier, who had not appeared in any
haste to justify herself; "your children always show you affection
by their own desire, never by mine: your penetration would certainly
discover the difference between attentions prompted by a governess, and
those which are shown by artless affection."

"My dear madam, say no more," said Mrs. Harcourt, holding out her hand:
"you are a real friend."

Mad. de Rosier now went to call Herbert, but on opening the door, Mrs.
Grace fell forward upon her face into the room; she had been kneeling
with her head close to the key-hole of the door; and, probably, the
sound of her own name, and a few sentences now and then spoken in
English, had so fixed her attention, that she did not prepare in time
for her retreat.

"Get up, Grace, and walk in, if you please," said Mrs. Harcourt, with
much calmness; "we have not the least objection to your hearing our
conversation."

"Indeed, ma'am," said Grace, as soon as she had recovered her feet, "I'm
above listening to any body's conversations, except that when one hears
one's own name, and knows that one has enemies, it is but natural to
listen in one's own defence."

"And is that all you can do, Grace, in your own defence?" said Mrs.
Harcourt.

"It's not all I can _say_, ma'am," replied Grace, pushed to extremities;
and still with a secret hope that her mistress, _upon a pinch, would not
part with a favourite maid_: "I see I'm of no further use in the family,
neither to young or old--and new comers have put me quite out of favour,
and have your ear to themselves--so, if you please, ma'am, I had better
look out for another situation."

"If you please, Grace," said Mrs. Harcourt.

"I will leave the house this instant, if you think proper, ma'am."

"If you think proper, Grace," said her mistress, with immovable
philosophy.

Grace burst into tears: "I never thought it would come to this, Mrs.
Harcourt--_I_, that have lived so long such a favourite!--but I don't
blame you, madam; you have been the best and kindest of mistresses to
me; and, whatever becomes of me, to my dying words, I shall always give
you and the dear young ladies the best of characters."

"The character we may give _you_, Grace, is of rather more consequence."

"Every thing that I say and do," interrupted the sobbing Grace, "is
_vilified_ and misinterpreted by those who wish me ill. I--"

"You have desired to leave me, Grace; and my desire is that you should
leave me," said Mrs. Harcourt, with firmness. "Mad. de Rosier and
I strictly forbade you to interfere with any of the children in our
absence; you have thought proper to disregard these orders; and were you
to stay longer in my house, I perceive that you would teach my children
first to disobey, and afterward to deceive me."

Grace, little prepared for this calm decision, now in a frightened,
humble tone, began to make promises of reformation; but her promises
and apologies were vain; she was compelled to depart, and every body was
glad to have done with her.

Favoretta, young as she was, had already learned from this cunning
waiting-maid habits of deceit which could not be suddenly changed. Mad.
de Rosier attempted her cure, by making her feel, in the first place,
the inconveniences and the disgrace of not being trusted. Favoretta was
ashamed to perceive that she was the only person in the house who
was watched: and she was heartily glad when, by degrees, she had
opportunities allowed her of obtaining a character for truth, and all
the pleasures and all the advantages of confidence.

Things went on much better after the gnome-like influence of Mrs Grace
had ceased; but we must now hasten to introduce our readers to Mrs.
Fanshaw. Mrs. Fanshaw was a card-playing lady, who had been educated
at a time when it was not thought necessary for women to have any
knowledge, or any taste for literature. As she advanced in life, she
continually recurred to the maxims as well as to the fashions of her
youth; and the improvements in modern female education she treated as
dangerous innovations. She had placed her daughter at a boarding-school
in London, the expense of which was its chief recommendation; and she
saw her regularly at the Christmas and Midsummer holidays. At length,
when Miss Fanshaw was about sixteen, her prudent mother began to think
that it was time to take her from school, and to introduce her into
the world. Miss Fanshaw had learned to speak French passably, to read
a _little_ Italian, to draw _a little_, to play tolerably well upon the
piano-forte, and to dance as well as many other young ladies. She had
been sedulously taught a sovereign contempt of whatever was called
_vulgar_ at the school where she was educated; but, as she was
profoundly ignorant of every thing but the routine of that school, she
had no precise idea of propriety; she only knew what was thought vulgar
or genteel at Suxberry House; and the authority of Mrs. Suxberry (for
that was the name of her schoolmistress) she quoted as incontrovertible
upon all occasions. Without reflecting upon what was wrong or right, she
decided with pert vivacity on all subjects; and firmly believed that
no one could know or could learn any thing who had not been educated
precisely as she had been. She considered her mother as an inferior
personage, destitute of genteel accomplishments: her mother considered
her as a model of perfection, that could only have been rendered thus
thoroughly accomplished by _the most expensive masters_--her only fear
was, that her dear Jane should be rather too _learned_.

Mrs. Harcourt, with Isabella and Matilda, paid Mrs. Fanshaw a visit, as
soon as they heard that her daughter was come home.

Miss Fanshaw, an erect stiffened figure, made her entrée; and it was
impossible not to perceive that her whole soul was intent upon her
manner of holding her head and placing her elbows, as she came into
the room. Her person had undergone all the ordinary and extraordinary
tortures of back-boards, collars, stocks, dumbbells, &c. She looked at
Isabella and Matilda with some surprise and contempt during the first
ten minutes after her entrance; for they were neither of them seated
in the exact posture which she had been instructed to think the only
position in which a _young lady_ should sit in company. Isabella got
up to look at a drawing; Miss Fanshaw watched every step she took, and
settled it in her own mind that Miss Harcourt did not walk as if she had
ever been at Suxberry House. Matilda endeavoured to engage the figure
that sat beside her in conversation; but the figure had no conversation,
and the utmost that Matilda could obtain was a few monosyllables
pronounced with affected gravity; for at Suxberry House this young
lady had been taught to maintain an invincible silence when produced to
strangers; but she made herself amends for this constraint, the moment
she was with her companions, by a tittering, gossiping species of
communication, which scarcely deserves the name of conversation.

Whilst the silent Miss Fanshaw sat so as to do her dancing-master strict
justice, Mrs. Fanshaw was stating to Mrs. Harcourt the enormous expense
to which she had gone in her daughter's education. Though firm to her
original doctrine, that women had no occasion for learning--in which
word of reproach she included all literature--she nevertheless had been
convinced, by the unanimous voice of fashion, that accomplishments were
_most desirable for young ladies_--desirable, merely because they were
fashionable; she did not, in the least, consider them as sources of
independent occupation.

Isabella was struck with sudden admiration at the sight of a head of
Jupiter which Miss Fanshaw had just finished, and Mrs. Harcourt borrowed
it for her to copy; though Miss Fanshaw was secretly but decidedly of
opinion, that no one who had not learned from the drawing-master at
Suxberry House could copy this head of Jupiter with any chance of
success.

There was a pretty little netting-box upon the table which caught
Matilda's eye, and she asked the silent figure what it was made of.
The silent figure turned its head mechanically, but could give no
information upon the subject. Mrs. Fanshaw, however, said that she
had bought the box at the Repository for ingenious works, and that the
reason she chose it was because Lady N---- had recommended it to her.

"It is some kind of new manufacture, her ladyship tells me, invented by
some poor little boy that she patronizes; her ladyship can tell you more
of the matter, Miss Matilda, than I can," concluded Mrs. Fanshaw; and,
producing her netting, she asked Mrs. Harcourt, "if she had not been
vastly notable to have got forward so fast with her work."

The remainder of the visit was spent in recounting her losses at the
card-table, and in exhortation to Mrs. Harcourt to send Miss Isabella
and Matilda to finish their education at Suxberry House.

Mrs. Harcourt was somewhat alarmed by the idea that her daughters would
not be equal to Miss Fanshaw in accomplishments but, fortunately for
Mad. de Rosier and herself, she was soon induced to change her opinion
by farther opportunities of comparison.

In a few days her visit was returned. Mrs. Harcourt happened to mention
the globe that Isabella was painting: Miss Fanshaw begged to see it, and
she went into Mrs. Harcourt's dressing-room, where it hung. The moment
she found herself with Isabella and Matilda, _out of company_, the
silent figure became talkative. The charm seemed to be broken, or rather
reversed, and she began to chatter with pert incessant rapidity.

"Dear me," said she, casting a scornful glance at Matilda's globe, "this
is vastly pretty, but we've no such thing at Suxberry House. I wonder
Mrs. Harcourt didn't send both of you to Suxberry House--every body
sends their daughters, who can afford it, now, to Suxberry House; but,
to be sure, it's very expensive--we had all silver forks, and every
thing in the highest style, and Mrs. Suxberry keeps a coach. I assure
you she's not at all like a schoolmistress, and she thinks it very rude
and vulgar of any body to call her a schoolmistress. Won't you ask your
mamma to send you, if it's only for the name of it, for one year, to
Suxberry House?"

"No," said Matilda; "we are so happy under the care of Mad. de Rosier."

"Ah, dear me! I forgot--mamma told me _you'd got_ a new French governess
lately--our French teacher, at Suxberry House, was so strict, and so
cross, if one made a mistake in the tenses: it's very well for you your
governess is not cross--does she give you very hard exercises?--let me
look at your exercise book, and I'll tell you whether it's the right
one--I mean _that_ we used to have at Suxberry House."

Miss Fanshaw snatched up a book, in which she saw a paper, which she
took for a French exercise.

"Come, show it me, and I'll correct the faults for you, before your
governess sees it, and she'll be so surprised!"

"Mad. de Rosier has seen it," said Matilda;--but Miss Fanshaw, in
a romping manner, pulled the paper out of her hands. It was the
translation of a part of "Les Conversations d'Emilie," which we formerly
mentioned.

"La!" said Miss Fanshaw, "we had no such book as this at Suxberry
House."

Matilda's translation she was surprised to find correct.

"And do you write themes?" said she--"We always wrote themes once every
week, at Suxberry House, which I used to hate of all things, for I
never could find any thing to say--it made me hate writing, I know;--but
that's all over now; thank goodness, I've done with themes, and French
letters, and exercises, and translations, and all those plaguing things;
and now I've left school for ever, I may do just as I please--that's the
best of going to school; it's over some time or other, and there's an
end of it; but you that have a governess and masters at home, you go
on for ever and ever, and you have no holidays either; and you have no
out-of-school hours; you are kept _hard at it_ from morning till night:
now I should hate that of all things. At Suxberry House, when we had
got our task done, and finished with the writing-master and the
drawing-master, and when we had practised for the music-master, and _all
that_, we might be as idle as we pleased, and do what we liked out of
school-hours--you know that was very pleasant: I assure you, you'd like
being at Suxberry House amazingly."

Isabella and Matilda, to whom it did not appear the most delightful of
all things to be idle, nor the most desirable thing in the world to have
their education finished, and then to lay aside all thoughts of farther
improvement, could not assent to Miss Fanshaw's concluding assertion.
They declared that they did not feel any want of holidays; at which Miss
Fanshaw stared: they said that they had no tasks, and that they liked
to be employed rather better than to be idle; at which Miss Fanshaw
laughed, and sarcastically said, "You need not talk to me as if your
governess were by, for I'm not a tell-tale--I shan't repeat what you
say."

Isabella and Matilda, who had not two methods of talking, looked rather
displeased at this ill-bred speech.

"Nay," said Miss Fanshaw, "I hope you aren't affronted _now_ at what I
said; when we are by ourselves, you know, one says just what comes
into one's head. Whose handsome coach is this, pray, with a coronet?"
continued she, looking out of the window: "I declare it is stopping at
your door; do let us go down. I'm never afraid of going into the room
when there's company, for we were taught to go into a room at Suxberry
House; and Mrs. Suxberry says it's very vulgar to be ashamed, and I
assure you it's all custom. I used to colour, as Miss Matilda does,
every minute; but I got over it before I had been long at Suxberry
House."

Isabella, who had just been reading "A Father's Legacy to his
Daughters," recollected at this instant Dr. Gregory's opinion, "that
when a girl ceases to blush, she has lost the most powerful charm
of beauty." She had not, however, time to _quote_ this in Matilda's
defence; for Miss Fanshaw ran down stairs, and Isabella recollected,
before she overtook her, that it would not be polite to remind her of
her early loss of charms.

Lady N---- was in the coach which had excited Miss Fanshaw's admiration;
and this young lady had a glorious opportunity of showing the graces
that she had been taught at so much expense, for the room was full of
company. Several morning visitors had called upon Mrs. Harcourt, and
they formed a pretty large circle, which Miss Fanshaw viewed upon her
entrance with a sort of studied assurance.

Mrs. Fanshaw watched Lady N----'s eye as her daughter came into
the room; but Lady N---- did not appear to be much struck with the
second-hand graces of Suxberry House; her eye passed over Miss Fanshaw,
in search of something less affected and more interesting.

Miss Fanshaw had now resumed her _company face_ and attitude; she sat
in prudent silence, whilst Lady N---- addressed her conversation
to Isabella and Matilda, whose thoughts did not seem to be totally
engrossed by their own persons.

Dr. X---- had prepared this lady to think favourably of Mad. de Rosier's
pupils, by the account which he had given her of Isabella's remarks upon
Zeluco.

A person of good sense, who has an encouraging countenance, can easily
draw out the abilities of young people, and from their manner of
listening, as well as from their manner of speaking, can soon form a
judgment of their temper and understanding.

Miss Fanshaw, instead of attending with a desire to improve herself from
sensible conversation, sat with a look as absent as that of an unskilful
actress, whilst the other performers are engaged in their parts.

There was a small book-case, in a recess, at the farthest end of the
room, and upon a little table there were some books, which Isabella
and Matilda had been reading with Mad. de Rosier. Mrs. Fanshaw looked
towards the table, with a sarcastic smile, and said--

"You are great readers, young ladies, I see: may we know what are your
studies?"

Miss Fanshaw, to show how well she could walk, crossed the room, and
took up one of the books.

"'Alison upon Taste'--that's a pretty book, I dare say--but la! what's
this, Miss Isabella? 'A Smith's Theory of Moral Sentiments'--dear me!
that must be a curious performance--by a smith! a common smith!"

Isabella, good-naturedly, stopped her from farther absurd exclamations
by turning to the title-page of the book and showing her the words
_"Adam Smith."_

"Ah! _A_ stands for _Adam!_ very true--I thought it was _a_ smith," said
Miss Fanshaw.

"Well, my dear," said her mother, who had quickness enough to perceive
that her daughter had made some mistake, by the countenances of the
company, but who had not sufficient erudition to know what the mistake
could be--"well, my dear, and suppose it was _a_ smith, there's nothing
extraordinary in that--nothing extraordinary in a smith's writing a
book nowadays,--why not a common blacksmith, as well as a common
ploughman?--I was asked, I know, not long ago, to subscribe _to_ the
poems of a common ploughman."

"The Ayrshire ploughman?" said Lady N----.

"Yes, they called him so, as I recollect, and I really had a mind to
put my name down, for I think I saw your ladyship's amongst the
subscribers."

"Yes, they are beautiful poems," said Lady N----.

"So I understand--there are some vastly pretty things in his
collection--but one hears of so many good things coming out every day,"
said Mrs. Fanshaw, in a plaintive voice. "In these days, I think, every
body writes--"

"And reads," said Lady N----.

"And reads," said Mrs. Fanshaw. "We have learned ladies now, wherever
one goes, who tell one they never play at cards--I am sure they are very
bad company. Jane," said she, turning to her daughter, "I hope you won't
take it into your head to turn out a reading lady!"

"Oh dear, no!" said Miss Fanshaw: "we had not much time for reading at
Suxberry House, we were so busy with our masters;--we had a charming
English master though, to teach us elocution, because it's so
fashionable now to read loud well. Mrs. Harcourt, _isn't it odd_ to read
English books to a French governess?" continued this young lady, whose
constrained taciturnity now gave way to a strong desire to show herself
off before Lady N----. She had observed that Isabella and Matilda had
been listened to with approbation, and she imagined that, when she
spoke, she should certainly eclipse them. Mrs. Harcourt replied to
her observation, that Mad. de Rosier not only read and spoke English
remarkably well, but that she had also a general knowledge of English
literature.

"Oh! here are some French books," said Miss Fanshaw, taking down one out
of the book-case--"'Journal Étranger'--dear me! are you translating _of_
this, Miss Isabella?"

"No," said Mrs. Harcourt; "Madame de Rosier brought it down stairs
yesterday, to show us an essay of Hume's on the study of history, which
is particularly addressed to women; and Mad. de Rosier says that it is
not to be found in several of the late editions of Hume's Essays--she
thought it singular that it should be preserved in a French
translation."

"There is," said Isabella, "an entertaining account in that essay of
a lady who asked Hume to lend her some novels! He lent her Plutarch's
Lives, which she thought very amusing, till she found out that they
were true. As soon as she came to the names of Caesar and Alexander, she
returned the books."

Mrs. Fanshaw was surprised that Lady N---- begged to look at this essay;
and was much disappointed to observe that the graceful manner in which
Miss Fanshaw presented the book to her ladyship escaped notice.

"Pray, Miss Matilda, is that a drawing?" said Mrs. Fanshaw, in hopes of
leading to a more favourable subject.

"Oh, dear me! do pray favour us with a sight of it!" cried Miss Fanshaw,
and she eagerly unrolled the paper, though Matilda assured her that it
was not a drawing.

It was Hogarth's print of a country dance, which was prefixed to his
"Analysis of Beauty."

"It is the _oddest_ thing!" exclaimed Miss Fanshaw, who thought every
thing _odd_ or _strange_ which she had not seen at Suxberry house.
Without staying to observe the innumerable strokes of humour and of
original genius in the print, she ran on--"La! its hardly worth any
one's while, surely, to draw such a set of vulgar figures--one hates low
humour." Then, in a hurry to show her taste for dress, she observed
that "people, formerly, must have had no taste at all;--one can hardly
believe such things were ever worn."

Mrs. Fanshaw, touched by this reflection upon the taste of former times,
though she seldom presumed to oppose any of her daughter's opinions,
could not here refrain from saying a few words in defence of sacks, long
waists, and whalebone stays, and she pointed to a row of stays in the
margin of one of these prints of Hogarth.

Miss Fanshaw, who did not consider that, with those who have a taste for
propriety in manners, she could not gain any thing by a triumph over her
mother, laughed in a disdainful manner at her mother's "_partiality for
stays_," and _wondered_ how any body could think long waists becoming.

"Surely, any body who knows any thing of drawing, or has any taste
for an antique figure, must acknowledge the present fashion to be most
graceful." She appealed to Isabella and Matilda.

They were so much struck with the impropriety of her manner towards her
mother, that they did not immediately answer; Matilda at length said,
"It is natural to like what we have been early used to;" and, from
unaffected gentleness, eager to prevent Miss Fanshaw from further
exposing her ignorance, she rolled up the print; and Lady N----, smiling
at Mrs. Harcourt, said, "I never saw a print more _gracefully_ rolled up
in my life." Miss Fanshaw immediately rolled up another of the prints,
but no applause ensued.

At the next pause in the conversation, Mrs. Fanshaw and her daughter
took their leave, seemingly dissatisfied with their visit.

Matilda, just after Mrs. Fanshaw left the room, recollected her pretty
netting-box, and asked Lady N---- whether she knew any thing of the
little boy by whom it was made.

Her ladyship gave such an interesting account of him, that Matilda
determined to have her share in relieving his distress.

Matilda's benevolence was formerly rather passive than active; but from
Mad. de Rosier she had learned that sensibility should not be suffered
to evaporate in sighs, or in sentimental speeches. She had also learnt
that economy is necessary to generosity; and she consequently sometimes
denied herself the gratification of her own tastes, that she might be
able to assist those who were in distress.

She had lately seen a beautiful print{3} of the king of France taking
leave of his family; and, as Mad. de Rosier was struck with it, she
wished to have bought it for her; but she now considered that a guinea,
which was the price of the print, might be better bestowed on this poor,
little, ingenious, industrious boy; so she begged her mother to send
to the repository for one of his boxes. The servants were all busy, and
Matilda did not receive her box till the next morning.

{Footnote 3: By Egginton.}

Herbert was reading to Mad. de Rosier when the servant brought the box
into the room. Favoretta got up to look at it, and immediately Herbert's
eye glanced from his book: in spite of all his endeavours to command his
attention, he heard the exclamations of "Beautiful!--How smooth!--like
tortoise-shell!--What can it be made of?"

"My dear Herbert, shut the book," said Mad. de Rosier, "if your head be
in that box. Never read one moment after you have ceased to attend."

"It is my fault," said Matilda; "I will put the box out of the way till
he has finished reading."

When Herbert had recalled his wandering thoughts, and had fixed his mind
upon what he was about, Mad. de Rosier put her hand upon the book--he
started--"Now let us see the _beautiful_ box," said she.

After it had passed through Favoretta and Herbert's impatient hands,
Matilda, who had scarcely looked at it herself, took it to the window,
to give it a sober examination. "It is not made of paper, or pasteboard,
and it is not the colour of tortoise-shell," said Matilda: "I never saw
any thing like it before; I wonder what it can be made of?"

Herbert, at this question, unperceived by Matilda, who was examining the
box very earnestly, seized the lid, which was lying upon the table, and
ran out of the room; he returned in a few minutes, and presented the
lid to Matilda. "I can tell you one thing, Matilda," said he, with an
important face--"it is an animal--an animal substance, I mean."

"Oh, Herbert," cried Matilda, "what have you been doing?--you have
blackened the corner of the box."

"Only the least bit in the world," said Herbert, "to try an experiment.
I only put one corner to the candle that Isabella had lighted to seal
her letter."

"My dear Herbert, how could you burn your sister's box?" expostulated
Madame de Rosier: "I thought you did not love mischief."

"Mischief!--no, indeed; I thought you would be pleased that I remembered
how to distinguish animal from vegetable substances. You know, the day
that my hair was on fire, you told me how to do that; and Matilda wanted
to know what the box was made of; so I tried."

"Well," said Matilda, good-naturedly, "you have not done me much harm."

"But another time," said Mad. de Rosier, "don't burn a box that costs
a guinea to try an experiment; and, above all things, never, upon any
account, take what is not your own."

The corner of the lid that had been held to the candle was a little
warped, so that the lid did not slide into its groove as easily as it
did before. Herbert was disposed to use force upon the occasion; but
Matilda with difficulty rescued her box by an argument which fortunately
reached his understanding in time enough to stop his hand.

"It was the heat of the candle that warped it," said she: "let us dip
it into boiling water, which cannot be made _too_ hot, and that will,
perhaps, bring it back to its shape."

The lid of the box was dipped into boiling-water, and restored to its
shape. Matilda, as she was wiping it dry, observed that some yellow
paint, or varnish, came off, and in one spot, on the inside of the lid,
she discovered something like writing.

"Who will lend me a magnifying glass?"

Favoretta produced hers.

"I have kept it," said she, "a great, _great_ while, ever since we were
at the Rational Toy-shop."

"Mad. de Rosier, do look at this!" exclaimed Matilda--"here are letters
quite plain!--I have found the name, I do believe, of the boy who made
the box!" and she spelled, letter by letter, as she looked through the
magnifying glass, the words Henri-Montmorenci.

Mad. de Rosier started up; and Matilda, surprised at her sudden emotion,
put the box and magnifying glass into her hand. Madame de Rosier's hand
trembled so much that she could not fix the glass.

"Je ne vois rien--lisez--vite!--ma chère amie--un mot de plus!" said
she, putting the glass again into Matilda's hand, and leaning over her
shoulder with a look of agonizing expectation.

The word _de_ was all Matilda could make out--Isabella tried--it was in
vain--no other letters were visible.

"_De_ what?--_de_ Rosier!--it must be! my son is alive!" said the
mother.

Henri-Montmorenci was the name of Mad. de Rosier's son; but when she
reflected for an instant that this might also be the name of some other
person, her transport of joy was checked, and seemed to be converted
into despair.

Her first emotions over, the habitual firmness of her mind returned.
She sent directly to the repository--no news of the boy could there
be obtained. Lady N---- was gone, for a few days, to Windsor; so no
intelligence could be had from her. Mrs. Harcourt was out--no carriage
at home--but Mad. de Rosier set out immediately, and walked to
Golden-square, near which place she knew that a number of French
emigrants resided. She stopped first at a bookseller's shop; she
described the person of her son, and inquired if any such person had
been seen in that neighbourhood.

The bookseller was making out a bill for one of his customers, but
struck with Mad. de Rosier's anxiety, and perceiving that she was a
foreigner by her accent, he put down his pen, and begged her to repeat,
once more, the description of her son. He tried to recollect whether he
had seen such a person--but he had not. He, however, with true English
good-nature, told her that she had an excellent chance of finding him
in this part of the town, if he were in London--he was sorry that his
shopman was from home, or he would have sent him with her through the
streets near the square, where he knew the emigrants chiefly lodged;--he
gave her in writing a list of the names of these streets, and stood at
his door to watch and speed her on her way.

She called at the neighbouring shops--she walked down several narrow
streets, inquiring at every house, where she thought that there was any
chance of success, in vain. At one a slip-shod maid-servant came to
the door, who stared at seeing a well-dressed lady, and who was so
bewildered, that she could not, for some time, answer any questions; at
another house the master was out; at another, the master was at dinner.
As it got towards four o'clock, Mad. de Rosier found it more difficult
to obtain civil answers to her inquiries, for almost all the tradesmen
were at dinner, and when they came to the door, looked out of humour, at
being interrupted, and disappointed at not meeting with a customer.
She walked on, her mind still indefatigable:--she heard a clock in the
neighbourhood strike five--her strength was not equal to the energy of
her mind--and the repeated answers of, "We know of no such person"--"No
such boy lives here, ma'am," made her at length despair of success.

One street upon her list remained unsearched--it was narrow, dark, and
dirty;--she stopped for a moment at the corner, but a porter, heavily
laden, with a sudden "By your leave, ma'am!" pushed forwards, and she
was forced into the doorway of a small ironmonger's shop. The master of
the shop, who was weighing some iron goods, let the scale go up, and,
after a look of surprise, said--

"You've lost your way, madam, I presume--be pleased to rest yourself--it
is but a dark place;" and wiping a stool, on which some locks had been
lying, he left Mad. de Rosier, who was, indeed, exhausted with fatigue,
to rest herself, whilst, without any officious civility, after calling
his wife from a back shop, to give the lady a glass of water, he went on
weighing his iron and whistling.

The woman, as soon as Mad. de Rosier had drunk the water, inquired if
she should send for a coach for her, or could do any thing to serve her.

The extreme good-nature of the tone in which this was spoken seemed to
revive Mad. de Rosier; she told her that she was searching for an only
son, whom she had for nearly two years believed to be dead: she showed
the paper on which his name was written: the woman could not read--her
husband read the name, but he shook his head--"he knew of no lad who
answered to the description."

Whilst they were speaking, a little boy came into the shop with a bit
of small iron wire in his hand, and, twitching the skirt of the
ironmonger's coat to attract his attention, asked if he had any such
wire as that in his shop. When the ironmonger went to get down a roll of
wire, the little boy had a full view of Mad. de Rosier. Though she was
naturally disposed to take notice of children, yet now she was so intent
upon her own thoughts that she did not observe him till he had bowed
several times just opposite to her.

"Are you bowing to me, my good boy?" said she--"you mistake me for
somebody else; I don't know you;" and she looked down again upon the
paper, on which she had written the name of her son.

"But, indeed, ma'am, I know _you_," said the little boy: "aren't you the
lady that was with the good-natured young gentleman, who met me going
out of the pastry-cook's shop, and gave me the two buns?"

Mad. de Rosier now looked in his face; the shop was so dark that she
could not distinguish his features, but she recollected his voice, and
knew him to be the little boy belonging to the dulcimer man.

"Father would have come again to your house," said the boy, who did not
perceive her inattention--"Father would have come to your house again,
to play the tune the young gentleman fancied so much, but our dulcimer
is broken."

"Is it? I am sorry for it," said Mad. de Rosier. "But can you tell me,"
continued she to the ironmonger, "whether any emigrants lodge in the
street to the left of your house?" The master of the shop tried to
recollect: she again repeated the name and description of her son.

"I know a young French lad of that make," said the little dulcimer boy.

"Do you?--Where is he? Where does he lodge?" cried Mad. de Rosier.

"I am not speaking as to his name, for I never heard his name," said the
little boy; "but I'll tell you how I came to know him. One day lately--"

Mad. de Rosier interrupted him with questions concerning the figure,
height, age, eyes, of the French lad.

The little dulcimer boy, by his answers, sometimes made her doubt, and
sometimes made her certain, that he was her son.

"Tell me," said she, "where he lodges; I must see him immediately."

"I am just come from him, and I'm going back to him with the wire; I'll
show the way with pleasure; he is the best-natured lad in the world;
he is mending my dulcimer; he deserves to be a great gentleman, and
I thought he was not what he seemed," continued the little boy, as he
walked on, scarcely able to keep before Mad. de Rosier.

"This way, ma'am--this way--he lives in the corner house, turning into
Golden-square." It was a stationer's.

"I have called at this house already," said Mad. de Rosier; but she
recollected that it was when the family were at dinner, and that a
stupid maid had not understood her questions. She was unable to speak,
through extreme agitation, when she came to the shop: the little
dulcimer boy walked straight forward, and gently drew back the short
curtain that hung before a glass door, opening into a back parlour. Mad.
de Rosier sprang forward to the door, looked through the glass, and was
alarmed to see a young man taller than her son; he was at work; his back
was towards her.

When he heard the noise of some one trying to open the door, he turned
and saw his mother's face! The tools dropped from his hands, and the
dulcimer boy was the only person present who had strength enough to open
the door.

How sudden! how powerful is the effect of joy! The mother, restored to
her son, in a moment felt herself invigorated--and, forgetful of her
fatigue, she felt herself another being. When she was left alone with
her son, she looked round his little workshop with a mixture of pain and
pleasure. She saw one of his unfinished boxes on the window-seat, which
served him for a work-bench; his tools were upon the floor. "These have
been my support," said her son, taking them up: "how much am I obliged
to my dear father for teaching me early how to use them!"

"Your father!" said Mad. de Rosier--"I wish he could have lived to be
rewarded as I am! But tell me your history, from the moment you were
taken from me to prison: it is nearly two years ago,--how did you
escape? how have you supported yourself since? Sit down, and speak
again, that I may be sure that I hear your voice."

"You shall hear my voice, then, my dear mother," said her son, "for at
least half an hour, if that will not tire you. I have a long story to
tell you. In the first place, you know that I was taken to prison; three
months I spent in the Conciergerie, expecting every day to be ordered
out to the guillotine. The gaoler's son, a boy about my own age, who
was sometimes employed to bring me food, seemed to look upon me with
compassion; I had several opportunities of obliging him: his father
often gave him long returns of the names of the prisoners, and various
accounts, to copy into a large book; the young gentleman did not like
this work; he was much fonder of exercising as a soldier with some
boys in the neighbourhood, who were learning the national exercise; he
frequently employed me to copy his lists for him, and this I performed
to his satisfaction: but what completely won his heart was my mending
the lock of his fusil. One evening he came to me in a new uniform, and
in high spirits; he was just made a captain, by the unanimous voice of
his corps; and he talked of _his_ men, and _his_ orders, with prodigious
fluency; he then played _his_ march upon his drum, and insisted upon
teaching it to me; he was much pleased with my performance, and,
suddenly embracing me, he exclaimed, 'I have thought of an excellent
thing for you; stay till I have arranged the plan in my head, and you
shall see if I am not a great general.' The next evening he did not come
to me till it was nearly dusk; he was in his new uniform; but out of a
bag which he brought in his hand, in which he used to carry his father's
papers, he produced his old uniform, rolled up into a surprisingly
small compass. 'I have arranged every thing,' said he; 'put on this
old uniform of mine--we are just of a size--by this light, nobody
will perceive any difference: take my drum and march out of the prison
slowly; beat my march on the drum as you go out; turn to the left, down
to the Place de ----, where I exercise my men. You'll meet with one of
my soldiers there, ready to forward your escape.' I hesitated; for I
feared that I should endanger my young general; but he assured me that
he had taken his precautions so '_admirably_,' that even after my escape
should be discovered, no suspicion would fall upon him. 'But, if you
delay,' cried he, 'we are both of us undone.' I hesitated not a moment
longer, and never did I change my clothes so expeditiously in my life:
I obeyed my little captain exactly, marched out of the prison slowly,
playing deliberately the march which I had been taught; turned to the
left, according to orders, and saw my punctual guide waiting for me on
the Place de ----, just by the broken statue of Henry the Fourth.

"'Follow me, fellow-citizen,' said he, in a low voice; 'we are not all
Robespierres.'"

Most joyfully I followed him. We walked on, in silence, till at length
we came to a narrow street, where the crowd was so great that I thought
we should both of us have been squeezed to death. I saw the guillotine
at a distance, and I felt sick.

"'Come on,' said my guide, who kept fast hold of me; and he turned
sharp into a yard, where I heard the noise of carts, and the voices of
muleteers. 'This man,' said he, leading me up to a muleteer, who seemed
to be just ready to depart, 'is my father; trust yourself to him.'

"I had nobody else to trust myself to. I got into the muleteer's covered
cart; he began a loud song; we proceeded through the square where the
crowd were assembled. The enthusiasm of the moment occupied them so
entirely, that we were fortunately disregarded. We got out of Paris
safely: I will not tire you with all my terrors and escapes. I, at
length, got on board a neutral vessel, and landed at Bristol. Escaped
from prison, and the fear of the guillotine, I thought myself happy; but
my happiness was not very lasting. I began to apprehend that I should be
starved to death; I had not eaten for many hours. I wandered through the
bustling streets of Bristol, where every body I met seemed to be full of
their own business, and brushed by me without seeing me. I was weak, and
I sat down upon a stone by the door of a public-house.

"A woman was twirling a mop at the door. I wiped away the drops with
which I was sprinkled by this operation. I was too weak to be angry;
but a hairdresser, who was passing by, and who had a nicely powdered wig
poised upon his hand, was furiously enraged, because a few drops of the
shower which had sprinkled me reached the wig. He expressed his anger
half in French and half in English; but at last I observed to him in
French, that the wig was still '_bien poudrée_'--this calmed his rage;
and he remarked that I also had been _horribly_ drenched by the shower.
I assured him that this was a trifle in comparison with my other
sufferings.

"He begged to hear my misfortunes, because I spoke French; and as I
followed him to the place where he was going with the wig, I told him
that I had not eaten for many hours; that I was a stranger in Bristol,
and had no means of earning any food. He advised me to go to a tavern,
which he pointed out to me--'The Rummer;'--he told me a circumstance,
which convinced me of the humanity of the master of the house.{4}

{Footnote 4: During Christmas week it is the custom in Bristol to keep a
cheap ordinary in taverns: the master of the Rummer observed a stranger,
meanly dressed, who constantly frequented the public table. It was
suspected that he carried away some of the provision, and a waiter
at length communicated his suspicions to the master of the house.
He watched the stranger, and actually detected him putting a large
mince-pie into his pocket. Instead of publicly exposing him, the
landlord, who judged from the stranger's manner that he was not an
ordinary pilferer, called the man aside as he was going away, and
charged him with the fact, demanding of him what could tempt him to such
meanness. The poor man immediately acknowledged that he had for several
days carried off precisely what he would have eaten himself for his
starving wife, but he had eaten nothing. The humane, considerate
landlord gently reproved him for his conduct, and soon found means to
have him usefully and profitably employed.}

"I resolved to apply to this benevolent man. When I first went into his
kitchen, I saw his cook, a man with a very important face, serving out
a large turtle. Several people were waiting with covered dishes, for
turtle soup and turtle, which had been bespoken in different parts of
the city. The dishes, as fast as they were filled, continually passed by
me, tantalizing me by their savoury odours. I sat down upon a stool near
the fire--I saw food within my reach that honesty forbade me to touch,
though I was starving: how easy is it to the rich to be honest! I was
at this time so weak, that my ideas began to be confused--my head grew
dizzy--I felt the heat of the kitchen fire extremely disagreeable to
me. I do not know what happened afterward; but when I came to myself, I
found that I was leaning against some one who supported me near an open
window: it was the master of the house. I do not know why I was ashamed
to ask him for food; his humanity, however, prevented me. He first
gave me a small basin of broth, and afterwards a little bit of bread,
assuring me, with infinite good nature, that he gave me food in such
small quantities, because he was afraid that it would hurt me to satisfy
my hunger at once--a worthy, humane physician, he said, had told him,
that persons in my situation should be treated in this manner. I thanked
him for his kindness, adding, that I did not mean to encroach upon his
hospitality. He pressed me to stay at his house for some days, but I
could not think of being a burden to him, when I had strength enough to
maintain myself.

"In the window of the little parlour, where I ate my broth, I saw a
novel, which had been left there by the landlord's daughter, and in the
beginning of this book was pasted a direction to the circulating library
in Bristol. I was in hopes that I might earn my bread as a scribe. The
landlord of the Rummer told me that he was acquainted with the master
of the library, and that I might easily procure employment from him on
reasonable terms.

"Mr. S----, for that was the name of the master of the library, received
me with an air of encouraging benevolence, and finding that I could read
and write English tolerably well, he gave me a manuscript to copy, which
he was preparing for the press. I worked hard, and made, as I fancied,
a beautiful copy; but the printers complained of my upright French hand,
which they could not easily decipher:--I began to new-model my writing,
to please the taste of my employers; and as I had sufficient motives to
make me take pains, I at last succeeded. I found it a great advantage
to be able to read and write the English language fluently; and when my
employers perceived my education had not been neglected, and that I
had some knowledge of literature, their confidence in my abilities
increased. I hope you will not think me vain if I add, that I could
perceive my manners were advantageous to me. I was known to be a
gentleman's son; and even those who set but little value upon _manners_
seemed to be influenced by them, without perceiving it. But, without
pronouncing my own eulogium, let me content myself with telling you my
history.

"I used often, in carrying my day's work to the printer's, to pass
through a part of the town of Bristol which has been allotted to poor
emigrants, and there I saw a variety of little ingenious toys, which
were sold at a high price, or at a price which appeared to me to be
high. I began to consider that I might earn money by invention, as well
as by mere manual labour; but before I gave up any part of my time to
my new schemes, I regularly wrote as much each day as was sufficient to
maintain me. Now it was that I felt the advantage of having been taught,
when I was a boy, the use of carpenters' tools, and some degree of
mechanical dexterity. I made several clumsy toys, and I tried various
unsuccessful experiments, but I was not discouraged. One day I heard a
dispute near me about some trinket--a toothpick-case, I believe--which
was thought by the purchaser to be too highly priced; the man who made
it repeatedly said, in recommendation of the toy--'Why, sir, you could
not know it from tortoise-shell.'

"I, at this instant, recollected to have seen, at the Rummer, a great
heap of broken shells, which the cook had thrown aside, as if they were
of no value. Upon inquiry, I found that there was part of the inside
shell which was thought to be useless--it occurred to me that I might
possibly make it useful. The good-natured landlord ordered that all
this part of the shells should be carefully collected and given to me.
I tried to polish it for many hours in vain. I was often tempted to
abandon my project--there was a want of _finish_, as the workmen call
it, in my manufacture, which made me despair of its being saleable. I
will not weary you with a history of all my unsuccessful processes;
it was fortunate for me, my dear mother, that I remembered one of
the principles which you taught me when I was a child, that it is
not _genius_, but perseverance, which brings things to perfection. I
persevered, and though I did not bring my manufacture to _perfection_,
I actually succeeded so far as to make a very neat-looking box out of my
refuse shells. I offered it for sale--it was liked: I made several
more, and they were quickly sold for me, most advantageously, by my
good friend, Mr. S----. He advised me to make them in the shape of
netting-boxes; I did so, and their sale extended rapidly.

"Some benevolent lady, about this time, raised a subscription for me;
but as I had now an easy means of supporting myself, and as I every day
beheld numbers of my countrymen, nearly in the condition in which I was
when I first went to the Rummer, I thought it was not fit to accept of
the charitable assistance, which could be so much better bestowed upon
others. Mr. S---- told me, that the lady who raised the contribution,
so far from being offended, was pleased by my conduct in declining her
bounty, and she undertook to dispose of as many of my netting-boxes as I
could finish. She was one of the patronesses of a repository in London,
which has lately been opened, called the 'Repository for Ingenious
Works.' When she left Bristol, she desired Mr. S---- to send my boxes
thither.

"My little manufacture continued to prosper--by practice I grew more and
more expert, and I had no longer any fears that I should not be able
to maintain myself. It was fortunate for me that I was obliged to be
constantly employed: whenever I was not actually at hard work, whenever
I had leisure for reflection, I was unhappy.

"A friend of Mr. S----, who was going to London, offered to take me with
him--I had some curiosity to see this celebrated metropolis, and I had
hopes of meeting with some of my friends amongst the emigrants in this
city--amongst all the emigrants at Bristol there was not one person with
whom I had been acquainted in France.

"Impelled by these hopes, I quitted Bristol, and arrived a few weeks ago
in London. Mr. S---- gave me a direction to a cabinet-maker in Leicester
Fields, and I was able to pay for a decent lodging, for I was now master
of what appeared to me a large sum of money--seven guineas.

"Some time after I came to town, as I was returning from a visit to an
emigrant, with whom I had become acquainted, I was stopped at the corner
of a street by a crowd of people--_a mob_, as I have been taught to
call it, since I came to England--who had gathered round a blind man, a
little boy, and a virago of a woman, who stood upon the steps before
a print-shop door. The woman accused the boy of being a thief. The boy
protested that he was innocent, and his ingenuous countenance spoke
strongly in his favour. He belonged to the blind man, who, as soon as
he could make himself heard, complained bitterly of the damage which had
been done to his dulcimer. The mob, in their first fury, had broken it.
I was interested for the man but more for the boy. Perhaps, said I to
myself, he has neither father nor mother!

"When the woman, who was standing yet furious at the shop-door, had no
more words for utterance, the little boy was suffered to speak in his
own defence. He said, that, as he was passing by the open window of the
print-shop, he put his hand in to give part of a bun which he was eating
to a little dog, who was sitting on the counter, near the window;
and who looked thin and miserable, as if he was half-starved. 'But,'
continued the little boy, 'when I put the bun to the dog's mouth, he did
not eat it; I gave him a little push to make him mind me, and he fell
out of the window into my hands; and then I found that it was not a
real dog, but only the picture of a dog, painted upon pasteboard. The
mistress of the shop saw the dog in my hand, and snatched it away,
and accused me of being a thief; so then, with the noise she made, the
chairmen, who were near the door, came up, and the mob gathered, and
our dulcimer was broken, and I'm very sorry for it.' The mistress of
the print-shop observed, in a loud and contemptuous tone, 'that all this
must be a lie, for that _such a one as_ he could not have buns to give
away to dogs!'--Here the blind man vindicated his boy, by assuring us
that 'he came honestly by the bun--that two buns had been given to him
about an hour before this time by a young gentleman, who met him as
he was coming out of a pastry-cook's shop.' When the mob heard this
explanation, they were sorry for the mischief they had done to the blind
man's dulcimer; and, after examining it with expressions of sorrow, they
quietly dispersed. I thought that I could perhaps mend the dulcimer, and
I offered my services; they were gladly accepted, and I desired the man
to leave it at the cabinet-maker's, in Leicester Fields, where I
lodged. In the meantime the little boy, whilst I had been examining the
dulcimer, had been wiping the dirt from off the pasteboard dog, which,
during the fray, had fallen into the street--'Is it not like a real
dog?' said the boy, 'Was it not enough to deceive any body?'

"It was, indeed, extremely like a _real_ dog--like my dog, Caesar, whom
I had taken care of from the time I was five years old, and whom I was
obliged to leave at our house in Paris, when I was dragged to prison.
The more I looked at this pasteboard image, the more I was convinced
that the picture must have been drawn from the life. Every streak, every
spot, every shade of its brown coat I remembered. Its extreme thinness
was the only circumstance in which the picture was unlike my Caesar.
I inquired from the scolding woman of the shop how she came by this
picture--'Honestly,' was her laconic answer; but when I asked whether it
were to be sold, and when I paid its price, the lady changed her tone;
no longer considering me as the partisan of the little boy, against whom
she was enraged, but rather looking upon me as a customer, who had paid
too much for her goods, she condescended to inform me that the dog
was painted by one of the _poor_ French emigrants, who lived in her
neighbourhood. She directed me to the house, and I discovered the man to
be my father's old servant Michael. He was overjoyed at the sight of me;
he was infirm, and unequal to any laborious employment; he had supported
himself with great difficulty by painting toys, and various figures of
men, women, and animals, upon pasteboard. He showed me two excellent
figures of French poissardes, and also a good cat, of his doing;--but my
Caesar was the best of his works.

"My lodgings at the cabinet-maker's were too small to accommodate
Michael; and yet I wished to have him with me, for he seemed so infirm
as to want assistance. I consequently left my cabinet-maker, and took
lodgings with this stationer; he and his wife are quiet people, and I
hope poor Michael has been happier since he came to me; he has, however,
been for some days confined to his bed, and I have been so busy, that I
have not been able to stir from home. To-day the poor little boy called
for his dulcimer; I must own that I found it a more difficult job to
mend it than I had expected. I could not match the wire, and I sent the
boy out to an ironmonger's a few hours ago. How little did I expect to
see him return with--my mother!"

We shall not attempt to describe the alternate emotions of joy and
sorrow which quickly succeeded each other in Mad. de Rosier's heart,
while she listened to her son's little history. Impatient to communicate
her happiness to her friends, she took leave hastily of her beloved son,
promising to call for him early the next day. "Settle all your
business to-night," said she, "and I will introduce you to _my_ friends
to-morrow. _My_ friends, I say proudly--for I have made friends since
I came to England; and England, amongst other commodities excellent in
their kind, produces incomparable friends--friends in adversity. _We_
know their value. Adieu: settle all your affairs here expeditiously."

"I have no affairs, no business, my dear mother," interrupted Henry,
"except to mend the dulcimer, as I promised, and that I'll finish
directly. Adieu, till to-morrow morning! What a delightful sound!"

With all the alacrity of benevolence he returned to his work, and his
mother returned to Mrs. Harcourt's. It was nearly eight o'clock before
she arrived at home. Mrs. Harcourt, Isabella, and Matilda, met her with
inquiring eyes.

"She smiles," said Matilda; and Herbert, with a higher jump than he had
ever been known to make before, exclaimed, "She has found her son!--I am
sure of it!--I knew she would find him."

"Let her sit down," said Matilda, in a gentle voice.

Isabella brought her an excellent dish of coffee; and Mrs. Harcourt,
with kind reproaches, asked why she had not brought her son _home_ with
her. She rang the bell with as much vivacity as she spoke, ordered her
coach to be sent instantly to Golden-square, and wrote an order, as she
called it, for his coming _immediately_ to her, quitting all dulcimers
and dulcimer boys, under pain of his mother's displeasure. "Here, Mad.
de Rosier," said she, with peremptory playfulness, "countersign my
order, that I may be sure of my prisoner."

Scarcely were the note and carriage despatched, before Herbert and
Favoretta stationed themselves at the window, that they might be ready
to give the first intelligence. Their notions of time and distance were
not very accurate upon this occasion; for before the carriage had
been out of sight ten minutes, they expected it to return; and they
exclaimed, at the sight of every coach that appeared at the end of the
street, "Here's the carriage!--Here he is!" But the carriages rolled by
continually, and convinced them of their mistakes.

Herbert complained of the dull light of the lamps, though the street was
remarkably well lighted; and he next quarrelled with the glare of the
flambeaux, which footmen brandished behind carriages that were unknown
to him. At length a flambeau appeared with which he did not quarrel.
Herbert, as its light shone upon the footman, looked with an eager eye,
then put his finger upon his own lips, and held his other hand forcibly
before Favoretta's mouth, for now he was certain. The coach stopped
at the door--Mad. de Rosier ran down stairs--Mrs. Harcourt and all
the family followed her--Herbert was at the coach door before Henri de
Rosier could leap out, and he seized his hand with the familiarity of an
old acquaintance.

The sympathy of all her joyful pupils, the animated kindness with which
Mrs. Harcourt received her son, touched Mad. de Rosier with the most
exquisite pleasure. The happiness that we are conscious of having
deserved is doubly grateful to the heart.

Mrs. Harcourt did not confine her attentions within the narrow limits
of politeness--with generous eagerness she exerted herself to show her
gratitude to the excellent governess of her children. She applied to the
gentleman who was at the head of the academy for the education of the
sons of French emigrants, and recommended Henri de Rosier to him in the
strongest terms.

In the meantime Lady N----, who had been warmly interested in Mad. de
Rosier's favour, and more by what she had seen of her pupils, wrote
to her brother, who was at Paris, to request that he would make every
possible inquiry concerning the property of the late Comte de Rosier.
The answer to her letter informed her that Mad. de Rosier's property was
restored to her and to her son by the new government of France.

Mrs. Harcourt, who now foresaw the probability of Mad. de Rosier's
return to France, could not avoid feeling regret at the thoughts of
parting with a friend to whom her whole family was sincerely attached.
The plan of education which had been traced out remained yet unfinished,
and she feared, she said, that Isabella and Matilda might feel the want
of their accomplished preceptress. But these fears were the best omens
for her future success: a sensible mother, in whom the desire to educate
her family has once been excited, and who turns the energy of her
mind to this interesting subject, seizes upon every useful idea, every
practical principle, with avidity, and she may trust securely to her
own persevering cares. Whatever a mother learns for the sake of her
children, she never forgets.

The rapid improvement of Mrs. Harcourt's understanding since she had
applied herself to literature, was her reward, and her excitement to
fresh application. Isabella and Matilda were now of an age to be her
companions, and her taste for domestic life was confirmed every day by
the sweet experience of its pleasures.

"You have taught me your value, and now you are going to leave me," said
she to Mad. de Rosier. "I quarrelled with the Duke de la Rochefoucault
for his asserting, that in the misfortunes of our best friends there is
always something that is not disagreeable to us; but I am afraid I
must stand convicted of selfishness, for in the good fortune of my best
friend there is something that I cannot feel to be perfectly agreeable."



MADEMOISELLE PANACHE.

SECOND PART{1}

 {Footnote 1: The first part is in the Parent's Assistant, vol. iv.}

The tendency of any particular mode of education is not always
perceived, before it is too late to change the habits or the character
of the pupil. To superficial observers, children of nearly the same age
often seem much alike in manners and disposition, who, in a few years
afterward, appear in every respect strikingly different. We have given
our readers some idea of the manner in which Mrs. Temple educated her
daughters, and some notion of the mode in which Lady Augusta was managed
by Mlle. Panache; the difference between the characters of Helen and
Lady Augusta, though visible even at the early age of twelve or thirteen
to an intelligent mother, was scarcely noticed by common acquaintance,
who contented themselves with the usual phrases, as equally applicable
to both the young ladies. "Upon my word, Lady Augusta and Miss Helen
Temple are both of them very fine girls, and very highly accomplished,
and vastly well educated, as I understand. I really cannot tell which to
prefer. Lady Augusta, to be sure, is rather the taller of the two, and
her manners are certainly more womanly and fashioned than Miss Helen's;
but then, Miss Helen Temple has something of simplicity about her
that some people think very engaging. For my part, I don't pretend to
judge--girls alter so; there's no telling at twelve years old what they
may turn out at sixteen."

From twelve to sixteen, Lady Augusta continued under the direction of
Mlle. Panache; whilst her mother, content with her daughter's progress
in external accomplishments, paid no attention to the cultivation of her
temper or her understanding. Lady S---- lived much in what is called the
world; was fond of company, and fonder of cards, sentimentally anxious
to be thought a good mother, but indolently willing to leave her
daughter wholly to the care of a French governess, whose character she
had never taken the trouble to investigate. Not that Lady S---- could
be ignorant that, however well qualified to teach the true French
pronunciation, she could not be a perfectly eligible companion for
her daughter as she grew up: her ladyship intended to part with the
governess when Lady Augusta was fifteen; but from day to day, and from
year to year, this was put off: sometimes Lady S---- thought it a pity
to dismiss mademoiselle, because "she was the best creature in the
world;" sometimes she rested content with the idea, that six months more
or less could not signify; till at length _family reasons_ obliged her
to postpone mademoiselle's dismission: part of the money intended for
the payment of the governess's salary had been unfortunately lost by the
mother at the card-table. Lady Augusta consequently continued under the
auspices of Mlle. Panache till her ladyship was eighteen, and till her
education was supposed to be entirely completed.

In the meantime Mlle. Panache endeavoured, by all the vulgar arts of
flattery, to ingratiate herself with her pupil, in hopes that from
a governess she might become a _companion_. The summer months seemed
unusually long to the impatient young lady, whose imagination daily
anticipated the glories of her next winter's campaign. Towards the end
of July, however, a reinforcement of visitors came to her mother's,
and the present began to engage some attention, as well as the future.
Amongst these visitors was Lord George ----, a young nobleman, near
twenty-one, who was heir to a very considerable fortune. We mention
his fortune _first_, because it was his _first_ merit, even in his own
opinion. Cold, silent, selfish, supercilious, and silly, there appeared
nothing in him to engage the affections, or to strike the fancy of a
fair lady; but Lady Augusta's fancy was not fixed upon his lordship's
character or manners, and much that might have disgusted consequently
escaped her observation. Her mother had not considered the matter very
attentively; but she thought that this young nobleman might be no bad
match for her Augusta, and she trusted that her daughter's charms
would make their due impression on his heart. Some weeks passed away in
fashionable negligence of the lady on his part, and alternate pique and
coquetry on hers, whilst, during these operations, her confidante and
governess was too much occupied with her own manoeuvres to attend to
those of her pupil. Lord George had with him upon this visit a Mr.
Dashwood, who was engaged to accompany him upon his travels, and who had
had the honour of being his lordship's tutor. At the name of a _tutor_,
let no one picture to himself a gloomy pedant; or yet a man whose
knowledge, virtue, and benevolence, would command the respect, or win
the affections, of youth. Mr. Dashwood could not be mistaken for a
pedant, unless a coxcomb be a sort of pedant. Dashwood pretended neither
to win affection nor to command respect; but he was, as his pupil
emphatically swore, "the best fellow in the world." Upon this best
fellow in the world, Mlle. Panache fixed her sagacious hopes; she
began to think that it would be infinitely better to be the wife of
the gallant Mr. Dashwood, than the humble companion or the slighted
governess of the capricious Lady Augusta. Having thus far opened the
views and characters of these various personages, we shall now give our
readers an opportunity of judging of them by their words and actions.

"You go with us, my lord, to the archery-meeting this evening?" said
Lady S----, as she rose from breakfast--his lordship gave a negligent
assent.

"Ah!" exclaimed Mlle. Panache, turning eagerly to Dashwood, "have you
seen _de uniforme?--C'est charmant_; and I have no small hand in it."

Dashwood paid the expected compliment to her taste. "Ah! _non_," said
she, "you are too good, too flattering; but you must tell me your
judgment without flattery! _Vous êtes homme de goût_, though an
Englishman--you see I have got no _préjugés_." Dashwood bowed.
"_Allons!_" said she, starting up with vast gaiety: "we have got no time
to lose. I have de _rubans_ to put to de bow; I must go and attend my
Diane."

"Attend her Diane!" repeated Dashwood, the moment the door was shut,
and he was left alone with Lord George. "Attend her Diane! a very
proper attendant." Lord George was wholly indifferent to propriety or
impropriety upon this, as upon all other subjects. "What are we to do
with ourselves, I wonder, this morning!" said he, with his customary
yawn; and he walked towards the window. The labour of finding employment
for his lordship always devolved upon his companion. "I thought, my
lord," said Dashwood, "you talked yesterday of going upon the water; the
river is very smooth, and I hope we shall have a fine day."

"I hope so too; but over the hill yonder it looks confounded black, hey?
Well, at any rate we may go down and make some of them get ready to go
with us. I'll take my black Tom--he's a handy fellow."

"But if you take black Tom," said Dashwood, laughing, "we must not
expect to have the ladies of our party; for you know mademoiselle has an
unconquerable _antipaty_, as she calls it, to a negro."

Lord George declared that, for this very reason, he would order black
Tom down to the water-side, and that he should enjoy her affectation,
or her terror, whichever it was, of all things. "I suppose," said he,
"she'll scream as loud as Lady Augusta screamed at a frog the other
day."

"I'll lay you a wager I spoil your sport, my lord; I'll lay you a
guinea I get mademoiselle into the boat without a single scream," said
Dashwood.

"Done!" said Lord George. "Two to one she screams."

"Done!" said Dashwood; and he hoped that, by proposing this bet, he had
provided his pupil with an object for the whole morning. But Lord George
was not so easily roused immediately after breakfast. "It looks terribly
like rain," said he, going back and forward irresolutely between the
door and the window. "Do you think it will rain, hey?"

"No, no; I'm sure it will not rain."

"I wouldn't lay two to one of that, however: look at this great cloud
that's coming."

"Oh! it will blow over."

"I don't know that," said Lord George, shaking his head with great
solemnity. "Which way is the wind?" opening the window. "Well, I believe
it may hold up, hey?"

"Certainly--I think so."

"Then I'll call black Tom, hey?--though I think one grows tired of going
upon the water," muttered his lordship, as he left the room. "Couldn't
one find something better?"

"Nothing better," thought Dashwood, "but to hang yourself, my lord,
which, I'll be bound, you'll do before you are forty, for want of
something better. But that's not my affair."

"Where's mademoiselle?" cried Lady Augusta, entering hastily, with a bow
and arrow in her hand: "I've lost my quiver: where's mademoiselle?"

"Upon my word I don't know," said Dashwood, assuming an air of interest.

"You don't know, Mr. Dashwood!" said Lady Augusta, sarcastically;
"that's rather extraordinary. I make it a rule, whenever I want
mademoiselle, to ask where you are, and I never found myself
disappointed before."

"I am sorry, madam, you should ever be disappointed," said Dashwood,
laughing. "Is this your ladyship's _own_ taste?" added he, taking the
painted bow out of her hand. "It's uncommonly pretty."

"Pretty or not, Lord George did not think it worth while to look at it
last night. His lordship will go through the world mighty easily, don't
you think so, Mr. Dashwood?" Dashwood attempted an apology for his
pupil, but in such a sort, as if he did not mean it to be accepted,
and then, returning the bow to her ladyship's hand, paused, sighed, and
observed, that, upon the whole, it was happy for his lordship that he
possessed so much nonchalance. "Persons of a different cast," continued
he, "cannot, as your ladyship justly observes, expect to pass through
life so easily." This speech was pronounced in a tone so different from
Dashwood's usual careless gaiety, that Lady Augusta could not help being
struck with it; and by her vanity, it was interpreted precisely as the
gentleman wished. Rank and fortune were her serious objects, but she
had no objection to amusing herself with romance. The idea of seeing the
gay, witty Mr. Dashwood metamorphosed, by the power of her charms, into
a despairing, sighing swain, played upon her imagination, and she heard
his first sigh with a look which plainly showed how well she understood
its meaning.

"Why now, was there ever any thing so provoking!" cried Lord George,
swinging himself into the room.

"What's the matter, my lord?" said Dashwood.

"Why, don't you see, it's raining as hard as it can rain?" replied his
lordship, with the true pathos of a man whose happiness is dependent
upon the weather. His scheme of going upon the water being now
impracticable, he lounged about the room all the rest of the morning,
supporting that miserable kind of existence, which idle gentlemen are
doomed to support, they know not how, upon a rainy day. Neither Lady
Augusta nor her mother, in calculating the advantages and disadvantages
of an alliance with his lordship, ever once considered his habits of
listless idleness as any objection in a companion for life.

After dinner the day cleared up--the ladies were dressed in their
archery uniform--the carriages came to the door, and Lord George was
happy in the prospect of driving his new phaeton. Dashwood handed
the ladies to their coach; for his lordship was too much engaged in
confabulation with his groom, on the merits of his off-leader, to pay
attention to any thing else upon earth.

His phaeton was presently out of sight, for he gloried in driving as
fast as possible; and, to reward his exertions, he had the satisfaction
of hearing two strangers, as he passed them, say--"Ha! upon my word,
those horses go well!" A postilion at a turnpike gate, moreover,
exclaimed to a farmer, who stood with his mouth wide open--"There goes
Lord George! he cuts as fine a figure on the road as e'er a man in
England." Such was the style of praise of which this young nobleman was
silly enough to be vain.

"I've been in these three quarters of an hour!" cried he, exultingly, as
Lady S---- got out of her coach.

"There has been no shooting yet though, I hope?" said Lady Augusta.

"No, no, ma'am," replied Dashwood; "but the ladies are all upon the
green--a crowd of fair competitors; but I'd bet a thousand pounds upon
your ladyship's arrows. Make way there--make way," cried the man of
gallantry, in an imperious tone, to some poor people, who crowded round
the carriage; and talking and laughing loud, he pushed forward, making
as much bustle in seating the ladies as they could have wished. Being
seated, they began to bow and nod to their acquaintance. "There's Mrs.
Temple and her daughters," said Lady S----.

"Where, ma'am?" said Lady Augusta: "I'm sure I did not expect to meet
them here. Where are they?"

"Just opposite to us. Pray, Mr. Dashwood, who is that gentleman in
brown, who is talking to Miss Helen Temple?" "Upon my word I don't know,
madam; he bowed just now to Lord George."

"Did he?" said Lady Augusta. "I wonder who he is!"

Lord George soon satisfied her curiosity, for, coming up to them, he
said negligently, "Dashwood, there's young Mountague yonder."

"Ha! is that young Mountague? Well, is his father dead? What has he done
with that old quiz?"

"Ask him yourself," said Lord George sullenly: "I asked him just now,
and he looked as black as November."

"He was so fond of his father--it is quite a bore," said Dashwood. "I
think he'll be _a quiz_ himself in due time."

"No," said Lord George; "he knows better than that too in some things.
He has a monstrous fine horse with him here; and that's a good pretty
girl that he's going to marry."

"Is he going to be married to Miss Helen Temple?" said Lady S----. "Who
is he, pray? I hope a suitable match."

"That I can't tell, for I don't know what she _has_," replied Lord
George. "But Mountague can afford to do as he pleases--very good
family--fine fortune."

"Yes; old quiz made an excellent nurse to his estate," observed
Dashwood; "he owes him some gratitude for that."

"Is not he very young to settle in the world?" said Lady S----.

"Young--yes--only a year older than I am," said Lord George; "but I knew
he'd never be quiet till he got himself _noosed_."

"I suppose he'll be at the ball to-night," said Lady Augusta, "and then
we shall see something of him, perhaps. It's an age since we've seen
the Miss Temples any where. I wonder whether there's any thing more
than report, my lord, in this conquest of Miss Helen Temple? Had you the
thing from good authority?"

"Authority!" said Lord George; "I don't recollect my authority,
faith!--somebody said so to me, I think. It's nothing to me, at any
rate." Lady Augusta's curiosity, however, was not quite so easily
satisfied as his lordship's; she was resolved to study Mr. Mountague
thoroughly at the ball; and her habitual disposition to coquetry, joined
to a dislike of poor Helen, which originated whilst they were children,
made her form a strong desire to rival Helen in the admiration of this
young gentleman of--"very good family and fine fortune." Her ladyship
was just falling into a reverie upon this subject, when she was summoned
to join the archeresses.

The prize was a silver arrow. The ladies were impatient to begin--the
green was cleared. Some of the spectators took their seats on benches
under the trees, whilst a party of gentlemen stood by, to supply the
ladies with arrows. Three ladies shot, but widely from the mark; a
fourth tried her skill, but no applause ensued; a fifth came forward,
a striking figure, elegantly dressed, who, after a prelude of very
becoming diffidence, drew her bow, and took aim in the most graceful
attitude imaginable.

"Who is that beautiful creature?" exclaimed Mr. Mountague, with
enthusiasm; and as the arrow flew from the bow, he started up, wishing
it success.

"The nearest, by six inches, that has been shot yet," cried Dashwood.
"Here, sir! here!" said he to Mr. Mountague, who went up to examine the
target, "this is Lady Augusta S----'s arrow, within the second circle,
almost put out the bull's eye!" The clamour of applause at length
subsiding, several other arrows were shot, but none came near to Lady
Augusta's, and the prize was unanimously acknowledged to be hers.

The silver arrow was placed on high over the mark, and several gentlemen
tried to reach it in vain: Mr. Mountague sprung from the ground with
great activity, brought down the arrow, and presented it, with an air of
gallantry, to the fair victor.

"My dear Helen," said Emma to her sister, in a low voice, "you are not
well."

"I!" replied Helen, turning quickly: "why! can you think me so mean as
to--"

"Hush, hush! you don't consider how loud you are speaking."

"Am I?" said Helen, alarmed, and lowering her tone; "but then, why did
you say I was not well?"

"Because you looked so pale."

"Pale! I'm sure I don't look pale," said Helen--"do I?"

"Not now, indeed," said Emma, smiling.

"Was not it an excellent shot?" said Mr. Mountague, returning to them;
"but you were not near enough to see it; do come and look at it." Mrs.
Temple rose and followed him.--"I can't say," continued he, "that I
particularly admire lady archeresses; but this really is a surprising
shot."

"It really is a surprising shot," said Helen, looking at it quite at
ease. But a moment afterwards she observed that Mr. Mountague's eyes
were not intent upon the _surprising shot_, but were eagerly turned to
another side of the green, where, illuminated by the rays of the setting
sun, stood a beautiful figure, playing with a silver arrow, totally
unconscious, as he imagined, either of her own charms or his
admiration.--"Are you acquainted with Lady Augusta?" said Mr. Mountague.

"Yes," said Mrs. Temple. "Are you?"

"Not yet; but I have met her mother often in town--a silly, card-playing
woman. I hope her daughter is as little like her in her mind as in her
person." Here Mr. Mountague paused, for they had walked up quite close
to the seemingly unconscious beauty.--"Oh, Mrs. Temple!" said she,
starting, and then recovering herself, with an innocent smile--"is it
you? I beg ten thousand pardons," and, offering a hand to Helen and
Emma, seemed delighted to see them. Helen involuntarily drew back her
hand, with as much coldness as she could without being absolutely rude.

It was now late in the evening, and as the ball was to begin at ten,
the ladies called for their carriages, that they might drive to their
lodgings, in an adjacent town, to change their dress. In the crowd,
Helen happened to be pretty close behind Lady S----, so close, that she
could not avoid hearing her conversation.

"Dear ma'am!" an elderly lady in black was saying to her, "I can assure
you, your ladyship has been misinformed. I assure you, it is no such
thing. He's a relation of the family--he has paid a long visit in
this country, but then it is a parting visit to his uncle: he sets out
immediately for Italy, I'm told. I assure you, your ladyship has been
misinformed; he and his uncle are often at Mrs. Temple's; but depend
upon it he has no thoughts of Miss Helen."

These words struck Helen to the heart: she walked on, leaning upon her
sister's arm, who fortunately happened to know where she was going. Emma
helped her sister to recollect that it was necessary to get into the
carriage when the step was let down. The carriage presently stopped with
them at the inn, and they were shown to their rooms. Helen sat down, the
moment she got up stairs, without thinking of dressing; and her mother's
hair was half finished, when she turned round and said, "Why, Helen, my
dear! you certainly will not be ready."

"Shan't I, ma'am?" said Helen, starting up. "Is there any occasion that
we should dress any more?"

"Nay, my dear," said Mrs. Temple, laughing, "look in the glass at your
hair; it has been blown all over your face by the wind."

"It is a great deal of useless trouble," said Helen, as she began the
duties of the toilette.

"Why, Helen, this is a sudden fit of laziness," said her mother.

"No, indeed, mamma; I'm not lazy. But I really don't think it signifies.
Nobody will take notice how I am dressed, I dare say."

"A sudden fit of humility, then?" said Mrs. Temple, still laughing.

"No, ma'am; but you have often told us how little it signifies. When the
ball is over, every thing about it is forgotten in a few hours."

"Oh, a sudden fit of philosophy, Helen?"

"No, indeed, mother," said Helen, sighing; "I'm sure I don't pretend to
any philosophy."

"Well, then, a sudden fit of caprice, Helen?"

"No, indeed, ma'am!"

"No, indeed, ma'am!" said Mrs. Temple, still rallying her.--Why, Helen,
my dear, you have answered 'No, indeed, ma'am,' to every thing I've said
this half hour."

"No, indeed, mother," said Helen; "but I assure you, ma'am," continued
she, in a hurried manner, "if you would only give me leave to explain--"

"My dear child," said Mrs. Temple, "this is no time for explanations:
make haste and dress yourself, and follow me down to tea." Mr. Mountague
was engaged to drink tea with Mrs. Temple.

How many reflections sometimes pass rapidly in the mind in the course of
a few minutes!

"I am weak, ridiculous, and unjust," said Helen to herself. "Because
Lady Augusta won a silver arrow, am I vexed? Why should I be displeased
with Mr. Mountague's admiring her? I will appear no more like a fool;
and Heaven forbid I should become envious."

As this last thought took possession of her mind, she finished dressing
herself, and went with Emma down to tea. The well-wrought-up dignity
with which Helen entered the parlour was, however, thrown away upon this
occasion; for opposite to her mother at the tea-table there appeared,
instead of Mr. Mountague, only an empty chair, and an empty teacup
and saucer, with a spoon in it. He was gone to the ball; and when Mrs.
Temple and her daughters arrived there, they found him at the bottom of
the country dance, talking in high spirits to his partner, Lady Augusta,
who, in the course of the evening, cast many looks of triumph upon
Helen. But Helen kept to her resolution of commanding her own mind,
and maintained an easy serenity of manner, which the consciousness of
superior temper never fails to bestow. Towards the end of the night, she
danced one dance with Mr. Mountague, and as he was leading her to her
place, Lady Augusta, and two or three of her companions, came up, all
seemingly stifling a laugh. "What is the matter?" said Helen. "Why, my
dear creature," said Lady Augusta, who still apparently laboured under a
violent inclination to laugh, and whispering to Helen, but so loud that
she could distinctly be overheard--"you must certainly be in love."

"Madam!" said Helen, colouring, and much distressed.

"Yes; you certainly must," pursued Lady Augusta, rudely; for ladies of
quality can be as rude, sometimes ruder, than other people. "Must
not she, Lady Di.," appealing to one of her companions, and laughing
affectedly--"must not she be either in love, or out of her senses? Pray,
Miss Temple, put out your foot." Helen put out her foot.

"Ay, that's the black one--well, the other." Now the other was white.
The ill-bred raillery commenced. Helen, though somewhat abashed, smiled
with great good humour, and walked on towards her seat. "What is the
matter, my dear?" said her mother.

"Nothing, madam," answered Mr. Mountague, "but that Miss Helen Temple's
shoes are odd, and her temper--even." These few words, which might pass
in a ball-room, were accompanied with a look of approbation, which made
her ample amends for the pain she had felt. He then sat down by Mrs.
Temple, and, without immediately adverting to any one, spoke with
indignation of coquetry, and lamented that so many beautiful girls
should be spoiled by affectation.

"If they be spoiled, should they bear all the blame?" said Mrs. Temple.
"If young women were not deceived into a belief that affectation
pleases, they would scarcely trouble themselves to practise it so much."

"Deceived!" said Mr. Mountague--"but is any body deceived by a person's
saying, 'I have the honour to be, madam, your obedient, humble servant?'
Besides, as to pleasing--what do we mean? pleasing for a moment, for a
day, or for life?"

"Pleasing for a moment," said Helen, smiling, "is of some consequence;
for, if we take care of the moments, the years will take care of
themselves, you know."

"Pleasing for _one_ moment, though," said Mr. Mountague, "is very
different, as you must perceive, from pleasing _every_ moment."

Here the country dance suddenly stopped, and three or four couple were
thrown into confusion. The gentlemen were stooping down, as if looking
for something on the floor. "Oh, I beg, I insist upon it; you can't
think how much you distress me!" cried a voice which sounded like Lady
Augusta's. Mr. Mountague immediately went to see what was the matter.
"It is only my bracelet," said she, turning to him. "Don't, pray don't
trouble yourself," cried she, as he stooped to assist in collecting
the scattered pearls, which she received with grace in the whitest hand
imaginable. "Nay, now I must insist upon it," said she to Mr. Mountague,
as he stooped again--"you shall not plague yourself any longer." And in
her anxiety to prevent him from plaguing himself any longer, she laid
upon his arm the white hand, which he had an instant before so much
admired. Whether all Mr. Mountague's sober contempt of coquetry was,
at this moment, the prevalent feeling in his mind, we cannot presume to
determine; we must only remark, that the remainder of the evening was
devoted to Lady Augusta; he sat beside her at supper, and paid her
a thousand compliments, which Helen in vain endeavoured to persuade
herself meant nothing more than--"I am, madam, your obedient, humble
servant."

"It is half after two," said Mrs. Temple, when she rose to go.

"Half after two!" said Mr. Mountague, as he handed Mrs. Temple to her
carriage--"bless me! can it be so late?"

All the way home Emma and Mrs. Temple were obliged to support the
conversation; for Helen was so extremely entertained with watching
the clouds passing over the moon, that nothing else could engage her
attention.

The gossiping old lady's information respecting Mr. Mountague was as
accurate as the information of gossips usually is found to be. Mr.
Mountague, notwithstanding her opinion and sagacity, _had thoughts
of Miss Helen Temple_. During some months which he had spent at his
uncle's, who lived very near Mrs. Temple, he had had opportunities of
studying Helen's character and temper, which he found perfectly well
suited to his own; but he had never yet declared his attachment to her.
Things were in this undecided situation, when he saw, and was struck
with the beauty of Lady Augusta ----, at this archery-ball. Lord George
---- introduced him to Lady S----; and, in consequence of a pressing
invitation he received from her ladyship, he went to spend a few days at
S---- Hall.

"So Mr. Mountague is going to spend a week at S---- Hall, I find," said
Mrs. Temple, as she and her daughters were sitting at work the morning
after the archery-ball. To this simple observation of Mrs. Temple a
silence, which seemed as if it never would be broken, ensued.

"Helen, my dear!" said Mrs. Temple, in a soft voice.

"Ma'am!" said Helen, starting.

"You need not start so, my dear; I am not going to say any thing very
tremendous. When you and your sister were children, if you remember, I
often used to tell you that I looked forward, with pleasure, to the time
when I should live with you as friends and equals. That time is come;
and I hope, now that your own reason is sufficiently matured to be the
guide of your conduct, that you do not think I any longer desire you to
be governed by my _will_. Indeed," continued she, "I consider you as my
equals in every respect but in _age_; and I wish to make that inequality
useful to you, by giving you, as far as I can, that advantage, which
only _age_ can give--experience."

"You are very kind, dear mother," said Helen.

"But you must be sensible," said Mrs. Temple, in a graver tone, "that it
will depend upon yourselves, in a great measure, whether I _can_ be so
much your friend as I shall wish."

"Oh, mother," said Helen, "_be_ my friend! I shall never have a better;
and, indeed, I want a friend," added she, the tears starting from her
eyes. "You'll think me very silly, very vain. He never gave me any
reason, I'm sure, to think so; but I did fancy that Mr. Mountague liked
me."

"And," said Mrs. Temple, taking her daughter's hand, "without being very
silly or very vain, may not one sometimes be mistaken? Then you thought
you had won Mr. Mountague's heart? But what did you think about your
own? Take care you don't make another mistake (smiling). Perhaps you
thought he never could win yours?"

"I never thought much about that," replied Helen, "till yesterday."

"And to-day," said Mrs. Temple--"what do you think about it to-day?"

"Why," said Helen, "don't you think, mother, that Mr. Mountague has a
great many good qualities?"

"Yes; a great many good qualities, a great many advantages, and, amongst
them, the power of pleasing you."

"He would not think _that_ any advantage," said Helen; "therefore I
should be sorry that he had it."

"And so should I," said Mrs. Temple, "be very sorry that my daughter's
happiness should be out of her own power."

"It is the uncertainty that torments me," resumed Helen, after a pause.
"One moment I fancy that he prefers _me_, the next moment I am certain
he prefers another. Yesterday, when we were coming away from the green,
I heard Mrs. Hargrave say to Lady S---- but why, mother, should I take
up your time with these minute circumstances? I ought not to think any
more about it."

"Ought not!" repeated Mrs. Temple; "my dear, it is a matter of prudence,
rather than duty. By speaking to your mother with so much openness, you
secure her esteem and affection; and, amongst the goods of this life,
you will find the esteem and affection of a mother worth having,"
concluded Mrs. Temple, with a smile; and Helen parted from her mother
with a feeling of gratitude, which may securely be expected from an
ingenuous well-educated daughter, who is treated with similar kindness.

No one was ready for breakfast the morning that Mr. Mountague arrived at
S---- Hall, and he spent an hour alone in the breakfast-room. At length
the silence was interrupted by a shrill female voice, which, as it
approached nearer, he perceived to be the voice of a foreigner half
suffocated with ineffectual desire to make her anger intelligible. He
could only distinguish the words--"I ring, ring, ring, ay, twenty time,
and nobody mind my bell nor me, no more dan noting at all." With a
violent push, the breakfast-room door flew open, and Mlle.
Panache, little expecting to find any body there, entered, volubly
repeating--"Dey let me ring, ring, ring!" Surprised at the sight of a
gentleman, and a young gentleman, she repented having been so loud
in her anger. However, upon the second reconnoitring glance at
Mr. Mountague, she felt much in doubt how to behave towards him.
Mademoiselle boasted often of the well-bred instinct, by which she could
immediately distinguish "_un homme comme il faut_" from any other; yet
sometimes, like Falstaff's, her instinct was fallacious. Recollecting
that Lady S---- had sent for an apothecary, she took it into her head
that Mr. Mountague was this apothecary. "Miladi is not visible yet,
sir," said she; "does she know you are here?"

"I hope not, ma'am; for I should be very sorry she were to be disturbed,
after sitting up so late last night."

"Oh, dat will do her no harm, for I gave her, _pardonnez_, some
excellent white wine whey out of my own head last night, when she got
into her bed. I hope you don't make no objection to white wine whey,
sir?"

"I!--not in the least, ma'am."

"Oh, I'm glad you don't disapprove of what I've done! You attend many
family in dis country, sir?"

"Madam!" said Mr. Mountague, taking an instant's time to consider what
she could mean by _attend_.

"You _visit_ many family in dis country, sir?" persisted mademoiselle.

"Very few, ma'am; I am a stranger in this part of the world, except at
Mrs. Temple's."

"Madame Temple, ah, _oui_! I know her very well; she has two fine
daughters--I mean when dey have seen more of de world. It's a great
pity, too, dey have never had de advantage of a native, to teach de
good pronunciation _de la langue Francaise_. Madame Temple will repent
herself of dat when it is too late, as I tell her always. But, sir, you
have been at her house. I am sorry we did not hear none of de family had
been indisposed."

"They are all now perfectly well, ma'am," replied Mr. Mountague,
"except, indeed, that Mrs. Temple had a slight cold last week."

"But she is re-establish by your _advise_, I suppose? and she--did she
recommend you to miladi?"

"No, madam," said Mr. Mountague, not a little puzzled by mademoiselle's
phraseology: "Lord George ---- did me the honour to introduce me to Lady
S----."

"Ah, Milord George! are you a long time acquainted wid milord?"

"Yes, ma'am, I have known Lord George many years."

"Ah, many year!--you be de family physician, _apparemment_?"

"The family physician! Oh no, ma'am!" said Mr. Mountague, smiling.

"Eh!" said mademoiselle, "but dat is being too modest. Many take _de
titre_ of physician, I'll engage, wid less pretensions. And," added she,
looking graciously, "_absolument_, I will not have you call yourself de
family _apothicaire_."

At this moment Lord George came in, and shook his family apothecary
by the hand, with an air of familiarity which astounded mademoiselle.
"_Qu'est ce que c'est_?" whispered she to Dashwood, who followed his
lordship: "is not dis his _apothicaire_?" Dashwood, at this question,
burst into a loud laugh. "Mr. Mountague," cried he, "have you been
prescribing for mademoiselle? she asks if you are not an apothecary."

Immediately Lord George, who was fond of a joke, especially where there
was a chance of throwing ridicule upon any body superior to him in
abilities, joined most heartily in Dashwood's mirth; repeating the
story, as "an excellent thing," to every one, as they came down to
breakfast; especially to Lady Augusta, whom he congratulated, the moment
she entered the room, upon her having danced the preceding evening with
an apothecary. "Here he is!" said he, pointing to Mr. Mountague.

"_Ma chère amie! mon coeur!_ tink of my mistaking your Mr. Mountague for
such a sort of person! If you had only told me, sir, dat you were Miladi
Augusta's partner last night, it would have saved me de necessity of
making ten million apologies for my stupidity, dat could not find
it out. _Ma chère amie! Mon coeur!_ Miladi Augusta, will you make my
excuse?"

"_Ma chère amie! mon coeur!_" repeated Mr. Mountague to himself: "is
it possible that this woman can be an intimate friend of Lady Augusta?"
What was his surprise, when he discovered that Mlle. Panache had been
her ladyship's governess! He fell into a melancholy reverie for some
moments. "So she has been educated by a vulgar, silly, conceited French
governess!" said he to himself; "but that is her misfortune, not her
fault. She is very young, and a man of sense might make her what he
pleased." When Mr. Mountague recovered from his reverie, he heard the
company, as they seated themselves at the breakfast-table, begin to talk
over the last night's ball. "You did not tire yourself last night with
dancing, my lord," said Dashwood.

"No; I hate dancing," replied Lord George: "I wish the ladies would take
to dancing with one another; I think that would be an excellent scheme."
An aunt of his lordship, who was present, took great offence at this
suggestion of her nephew. She had been used to the deference paid in
former times to the sex; and she said she could not bear to see women
give up their proper places in society. "Really, George," added she,
turning to her nephew, "I wish you would not talk in this manner. The
young men now give themselves the strangest airs. Lady S----, I will
expose him; do you know, last night, he was lolling at his full length
upon a bench in the ball-room, while three young handsome ladies were
standing opposite to him, tired to death."

"They could not be more tired than I was, I am sure, ma'am."

"Why, you had not been dancing, and they had."

"Had they, ma'am? that was not my fault. I did not ask 'em to dance, and
I don't see it was my business to ask 'em to sit down. I did not know
who they were, at any rate," concluded his lordship, sullenly.

"You knew they were women, and as such entitled to your respect."

Lord George gave a sneering smile, looked at Dashwood, and pulled up his
boot.

"Another thing--you were in the house three weeks with Miss Earl last
summer; you met her yesterday evening, and you thought proper not to
take the least notice of her."

"Miss, Earl, ma'am; was she there?"

"Yes, close to you, and you never even bowed to her."

"I did not see her, ma'am."

"Mrs. Earl spoke to you."

"I didn't hear her, ma'am."

"I told you of it at the moment."

"I didn't understand you, ma'am."

"Besides, ma'am," interposed Dashwood, "as to Miss Earl, if she meant
that my lord should bow to her, she should have curtsied first to him."

"Curtsied first to him!"

"Yes, that's the rule--that's the thing now. The ladies are always to
speak first."

"I have nothing more to say, if that be the case. Lady Augusta, what say
you to all this?"

"Oh, that it's shocking to be sure!" said Lady Augusta, "if one thinks
of it; so the only way is not to think about it."

"An excellent bon-mot!" exclaimed Dashwood. "It's _thinking_ that spoils
conversation, and every thing else."

"But," added Lady Augusta, who observed that her bon-mot was not so much
admired by all the company as by Dashwood, "I really only mean, that one
must do as other people do."

"_Assurément_," said mademoiselle; "not dat I approve of the want of
gallantry in our gentlemen, neider. But, I tink, Mademoiselle Earl is
as stiff as de poker, and I don't approve of dat, neider--_Je n'aime pas
les prudes, moi_."

"But, without prudery, may not there be dignity of manners?" said the
old lady, gravely.

"_Dignité!_--Oh, I don't say noting against _dignité_, neider; not but
I tink de English reserve is _de trop_. I tink a lady of a certain
rank has always good _principes_ enough, to be sure, and as to the rest
_qu'importe?_--dat's my notions."

Mr. Mountague looked with anxiety at Lady Augusta, to see what she
thought of her governess's notions; but all that he could judge from
her countenance was that she did not think at all. "Well, she has time
enough before her to learn to think," said he to himself. "I am glad
she did not assent to mademoiselle's _notions_, at least. I hope she has
learnt nothing from her but '_the true French pronunciation_.'"

No sooner was breakfast finished than Lord George ---- gave his
customary morning yawn, and walked as usual to the window. "Come," said
Dashwood, in his free manner--"come, mademoiselle, you must come down
with us to the water-side, and Lady Augusta, I hope."

"Ay," whispered Lord George to Dashwood, "and let's settle our wager
about mademoiselle and my blackamore--don't think I'll let you off
that."

"Off!--I'm ready to double the bet, my lord," said Dashwood aloud,
and in the same moment turned to mademoiselle with some high-flown
compliment about the beauty of her complexion, and the dangers of going
without a veil on a hot sunny day.

"Well, Mr. Dashwood, when you've persuaded mademoiselle to take the
veil, we'll set out, if you please," said Lady Augusta.

Mr. Mountague, who kept his attention continually upon Lady Augusta,
was delighted to see that she waited for the elderly lady, who, at
breakfast, had said so much in favour of dignity of manners. Mr.
Mountague did not, at this moment, consider that this elderly lady was
Lord George's aunt, and that the attention paid to her by Lady Augusta
might possibly proceed from motives of policy, not from choice. Young
men of open tempers and generous dispositions are easily deceived by
coquettes, because they cannot stoop to invent the meanness of their
artifices. As Mr. Mountague walked down to the river, Lady Augusta
contrived to entertain him so completely, that Helen Temple never once
came into his mind; though he had sense enough to perceive his danger,
he had not sufficient _courage_ to avoid it: it sometimes requires
courage to fly from danger. From this agreeable _tête-à-tête_ he was
roused, however, by the voice of Mlle. Panache, who, in an affected
agony, was struggling to get away from Dashwood, who held both her
hands--"No! no!--_Non! non!_ I will not--I will not, I tell you, I will
not."

"Nay, nay," said Dashwood; "but I have sworn to get you into the boat."

"Ah! into de boat _à la bonne heure_; but not wid dat vilain black."

"Well, then, persuade Lord George to send back his man; and you'll
acknowledge, my lord, in that case it's a drawn bet," said Dashwood.

"I! not I. I'll acknowledge nothing," replied his lordship; and he swore
his black Tom should not be sent away: "he's a capital boatman, and I
can't do without him."

"Den I won't stir," said mademoiselle, passionately, to Dashwood.

"Then I must carry you, must I?" cried Dashwood, laughing; and
immediately, to Mr. Mountague's amazement, a romping scene ensued
between this tutor and governess, which ended in Dashwood's carrying
mademoiselle in his arms into the boat, amidst the secret derision
of two footmen, and the undisguised laughter of black Tom, who were
spectators of the scene.

Mr. Mountague trembled at the thoughts of receiving a wife from the
hands of a Mlle. Panache; but, turning his eye upon Lady Augusta, he
thought she blushed, and this blush at once saved her, in his opinion,
and increased his indignation against her governess. Mademoiselle being
now alarmed, and provoked by the laughter of the servants, the dry
sarcastic manner of Lord George, the cool air of Mr. Mountague, and the
downcast looks of her pupil, suddenly turned to Dashwood, and in a high
angry tone assured him, "that she had never seen nobody have so much
assurance;" and she demanded, furiously--"how he could ever tink to take
such liberties wid her? Only tell me how you could dare to tink of it?"

"I confess I did not _think_ as I ought to have done, mademoiselle,"
replied Dashwood, looking an apology to Lady Augusta, which, however, he
took great care mademoiselle should not observe. "But your bet, my lord,
if you please," added he, attempting to turn it off in a joke: "there
was no scream--my bet's fairly won."

"I assure you, sir, dis won't do: it's no good joke, I promise you.
_Ma chère amie, mon coeur_," cried mademoiselle to Lady
Augusta--"_viens_--come, let us go--Don't touch that," pursued she,
roughly, to black Tom, who was going to draw away the plank that led
to the shore. "I will go home dis minute, and speak to Miladi S----.
_Viens! viens, ma chère amie!_"--and she darted out of the boat, whilst
Dashwood followed, in vain attempting to stop her. She prudently,
however, took the longest way through the park, that she might have a
full opportunity of _listening to reason_, as Dashwood called it; and
before she reached home, she was perfectly convinced of the expediency
of moderate measures. "Let the thing rest where it is," said Dashwood:
"it's a joke, and there's an end of it; but if you take it in earnest,
you know the story might not tell so well, even if you told it, and
there would never be an end of it." All this, followed by a profusion of
compliments, ratified a peace, which the moment he had made, he
laughed at himself for having taken so much trouble to effect; whilst
mademoiselle rested in the blessed persuasion that Dashwood was
desperately in love with her; nay, so little knowledge had she of the
human heart as to believe that the scene which had just passed was a
proof of his passion.

"I wonder where's Miladi Augusta? I thought she was wid me all this
time," said she.

"She's coming; don't you see her at the end of the grove with Mr.
Mountague? We have walked fast,"

"Oh, she can't never walk so fast as me; I tink I am as young as she
is."

Dashwood assented, at the same time pondering upon the consequences
of the attachment which he saw rising in Mr. Mountague's mind for Lady
Augusta. If a man of sense were to gain an influence over her, Dashwood
feared that all his hopes would be destroyed, and he resolved to use
all his power over mademoiselle to prejudice her, and by her means to
prejudice her pupil against this gentleman. Mademoiselle's having begun
by taking him for an _apothicaire_, was a circumstance much in favour
of Dashwood's views, because she felt herself pledged to justify, or at
least to persist, in her opinion, that he did not look like _un homme
comme il faut_.

In the mean time Mr. Mountague was walking slowly towards them with Lady
Augusta, who found it necessary to walk as slowly as possible, because
of the heat. He had been reflecting very soberly upon her ladyship's
late blush, which, according to his interpretation, said, as plainly as
a blush could say, all that the most refined sense and delicacy could
dictate. Yet such is, upon some occasions, the inconsistency of the
human mind, that he by no means felt _sure_ that the lady had blushed at
all. Her colour was, perhaps, a shade higher than usual; but then it was
hot weather, and she had been walking. The doubt, however, Mr.
Mountague thought proper to suppress; and the reality of the blush,
once thoroughly established in his imagination, formed the foundation
of several ingenious theories of moral sentiment, and some truly logical
deductions. A passionate admirer of grace and beauty, he could not help
wishing that he might find Lady Augusta's temper and understanding equal
to her personal accomplishments. When we are very anxious to discover
perfections in any character, we generally succeed, or fancy that we
succeed. Mr. Mountague quickly discovered many amiable and interesting
qualities in this fair lady, and, though he perceived some defects, he
excused them to himself with the most philosophic ingenuity.

"Affectation," the judicious Locke observes, "has always the laudable
aim of pleasing:" upon this principle Mr. Mountague could not reasonably
think of it with severity. "From the desire of pleasing," argued
he, "proceeds not only all that is amiable, but much of what is most
estimable in the female sex. This desire leads to affectation and
coquetry, to folly and vice, only when it is extended to unworthy
objects. The moment a woman's wish to please becomes discriminative, the
moment she feels any attachment to a man superior to the vulgar herd,
she not only ceases to be a coquette, but she exerts herself to excel in
every thing that he approves, and, from her versatility of manners, she
has the happy power of adapting herself to his taste, and of becoming
all that his most sanguine wishes could desire." The proofs of this
discriminative taste, and the first symptoms of this salutary attachment
to a man superior to the vulgar herd, Mr. Mountague thought he discerned
very plainly in Lady Augusta, nor did he ever forget that she was but
eighteen. "She is so very young," said he to himself, "that it is but
reasonable I should constantly consider what she may become, rather than
what she is." To do him justice, we shall observe, that her ladyship at
this time, with all the address of which so young a lady was capable,
did every thing in her power to confirm Mr. Mountague in his favourable
sentiments of her.

Waiting for some circumstance to decide his mind, he was at length
determined by the generous enthusiasm, amiable simplicity, and candid
good sense which Lady Augusta showed in speaking of a favourite friend
of hers, of whom he could not approve. This friend, Lady Diana, was one
of the rude ladies who had laughed with so much ill-nature at Helen's
white and black shoes at the archery ball. She was a dashing, rich,
extravagant, fashionable widow, affecting bold horsemanlike manners, too
often "touching the brink of all we hate," without exciting any passions
allied to love. Her look was almost an oath--her language was suitable
to her looks--she swore and dressed to the height of the fashion--she
could drive four horses in hand--was a desperate huntress--and so
loud in the praises of her dogs and horses, that she intimidated
even sportsmen and jockeys. She talked so much of her favourite horse
_Spanker_, that she acquired amongst a particular set of gentlemen the
appellation of my Lady Di Spanker. Lady Augusta perceived that the soft
affectations remarkable in her own manners were in agreeable contrast
in the company of this masculine dame; she therefore cultivated her
acquaintance, and Lady S---- could make no objection to a woman who was
well received every where; she was rather flattered to see her daughter
taken notice of by this dashing belle; consequently, Lady Di. Spanker,
for by that name we also shall call her, frequently rode over from
Cheltenham, which was some miles distant from S---- Hall. One morning
she called upon Lady Augusta, and insisted upon her coming out to try
her favourite horse. All the gentlemen went down immediately to assist
in putting her ladyship on horseback: this was quite unnecessary, for
Lady Diana took that office upon herself. Lady Augusta was all timidity,
and was played off to great advantage by the rough raillery of her
friend. At length she conquered her fears so much as to seat herself
upon the side-saddle; her riding mistress gathered up the reins for
her, and fixed them properly in her timid hands; then armed her with her
whip, exhorting her, "for God's sake, not to be such a coward!" Scarcely
was the word _coward_ pronounced, when Lady Augusta, by some unguarded
motion of her whip, gave offence to her high-mettled steed, which
instantly began to rear: there was no danger, for Mr. Mountague caught
hold of the reins, and Lady Augusta was dismounted in perfect safety.
"How now, Spanker!" exclaimed Lady Di., in a voice calculated to strike
terror into the nerves of a horse--"how now, Spanker!" and mounting him
with masculine boldness of gesture--"I'll teach you, sir, who's your
mistress," continued she; "I'll make you pay for these tricks!"
Spanker reared again, and Lady Di. gave him what she called "a complete
dressing!" In vain Lady Augusta screamed; in vain the spectators
entreated the angry amazon to spare the whip; she persisted in beating
Spanker till she fairly mastered him. When he was perfectly subdued, she
dismounted with the same carelessness with which she had mounted; and,
giving the horse to her groom, pushed back her hat, and looked round for
applause. Lord George, roused to a degree of admiration, which he had
never before been heard to express for any thing female, swore that,
in all his life, he had never seen any thing better done; and Lady Di.
Spanker received his congratulations with a loud laugh, and a hearty
shake of the hand. "Walk him about, Jack," added she, turning to the
groom, who held her horse; "walk him about, for he's all in a lather;
and when he's cool, bring him up here again. And then, my dear child,"
said she to Lady Augusta, "you shall give him a fair trial."

"I!--Oh! never, never!" cried Lady Augusta, shrinking back with a faint
shriek: "this is a trial to which you must not put my friendship. I must
insist upon leaving Spanker to your management; I would not venture upon
him again for the universe."

"How can you talk so like a child--so like a woman?" cried her friend.

"I confess, I am a very woman," said Lady Augusta, with a sigh: "and I
fear I shall never be otherwise."

"_Fear_!" repeated Mr. Mountague, to whom even the affectation of
feminine softness and timidity appeared at this instant charming, from
the contrast with the masculine intrepidity and disgusting coarseness of
Lady Diana Spanker's manners. The tone in which he pronounced the single
word _fear_ was sufficient to betray his feelings towards both the
ladies. Lady Di. gave him a look of sovereign contempt. "All I know and
can tell you," cried she, "is, that fear should never get a-horseback."
Lord George burst into one of his loud laughs. "But as to the rest,
_fear_ may be a confounded good thing in its proper place; but they say
it's catching; so I must run away from you, child," said she to Lady
Augusta. "Jack, bring up Spanker. I've twenty miles to ride before
dinner. I've no time to lose," pulling out her watch: "faith, I've
fooled away an hour here; Spanker must make it up for me. God bless you
all! Good bye!" and she mounted her horse, and galloped off full speed.

"God bless ye! good bye to ye, Lady Di. Spanker," cried Dashwood, the
moment she was out of hearing. "Heaven preserve us from amazons!" Lord
George did not say, _Amen_. On the contrary, he declared she was a fine
dashing woman, and seemed to have a great deal of blood about her. Mr.
Mountague watched Lady Augusta's countenance in silence, and was much
pleased to observe that she did not assent to his lordship's encomium.
"She has good sense enough to perceive the faults of her new friend, and
now her eyes are open she will no longer make a favourite companion, I
hope, of this odious woman," thought he. "I am afraid, I am sadly afraid
you are right," said Lady Augusta, going up to the elderly lady, whom
we formerly mentioned, who had seen all that had passed from the open
windows of the drawing-room. "I own I _do_ see something of what you
told me the other day you disliked so much in my friend, Lady Di.;" and
Lady Augusta gave the candid sigh of expiring friendship as she uttered
these words.

"Do you know," cried Dashwood, "that this spanking horsewoman has
frightened us all out of our senses? I vow to Heaven, I never was so
much terrified in my life as when I saw you, Lady Augusta, upon that
vicious animal."

"To be sure," said Lady Augusta, "it was very silly of me to venture; I
almost broke my neck, out of _pure friendship_."

"It is well it is no worse," said the elderly lady: "if a fall from a
horse was the worst evil to be expected from a friendship with a woman
of this sort, it would be nothing very terrible."

Lady Augusta, with an appearance of ingenuous candour, sighed again,
and replied--"It is so difficult to see any imperfections in those one
loves! Forgive me, if I spoke with too much warmth, madam, the other
day, in vindication of my friend. I own I ought to have paid more
deference to your judgment and knowledge of the world, so much superior
to my own; but certainly I must confess, the impropriety of her
amazonian manners, as Mr. Dashwood calls them, never struck my partial
eyes till this morning. Nor could I, nor would I, believe half the world
said of her; indeed, even now, I am persuaded she is, in the main, quite
irreproachable; but I feel the truth of what you said to me, madam, that
young women cannot be too careful in the choice of their female friends;
that we are judged of by our companions; how unfairly one must be
judged of sometimes!" concluded her ladyship, with a look of pensive
reflection.

Mr. Mountague never thought her half so beautiful as at this instant.
"How _mind_ embellishes beauty!" thought he; "and what quality of the
mind more amiable than candour!--All that was wanting to her character
was reflection; and could one expect so much reflection as this from a
girl of eighteen, who had been educated by a Mlle. Panache?" Our readers
will observe that this gentleman now reasoned like a madman, but
not like a fool; his deductions from the appearances before him were
admirable; but these appearances were false. He had not observed that
Lady Augusta's eyes were open to the defects of her amazonian friend, in
the very moment that Lord George ---- was roused to admiration by
this horseman belle. Mr. Mountague did not perceive that the candid
reflections addressed to his lordship's aunt were the immediate
consequence of female jealousy.

The next morning, at breakfast, Lord George was summoned three times
before he made his appearance: at length he burst in, with a piece of
news he had just heard from his groom--"That Lady Di. Spanker, in riding
home full gallop the preceding day, had been thrown from her horse by an
old woman. Faith, I couldn't believe the thing," added Lord George, with
a loud laugh; "for she certainly sits a horse better than any woman in
England; but my groom had the whole story from the grand-daughter of the
old woman who was run over."

"Run over!" exclaimed Lady Augusta; "was the poor woman run over?--was
she hurt?"

"Hurt! yes, she was hurt, I fancy," said Lord George. "I never heard of
any body's being run over without being hurt. The girl has a petition
that will come up to us just now, I suppose. I saw her in the back yard
as I came in."

"Oh! let us see the poor child," said Lady Augusta: "do let us have her
called to this window." The window opened down to the ground, and, as
soon as the little girl appeared with the petition in her hand, Lady
Augusta threw open the sash, and received it from her timid hand with
a smile, which to Mr. Mountague seemed expressive of sweet and graceful
benevolence. Lady Augusta read the petition with much feeling, and her
lover thought her voice never before sounded so melodious. She wrote
her name eagerly at the head of a subscription. The money she gave was
rather more than the occasion required; but, thought Mr. Mountague,

     "If the generous spirit flow
     Beyond where prudence fears to go
     Those errors are of nobler kind,
     Than virtues of a narrow mind{2}."

{Footnote 2: Soame Jenyns.}

By a series of petty artifices Lady Augusta contrived to make herself
appear most engaging and amiable to this artless young man: but the
moment of success was to her the moment of danger. She was little aware,
that when a man of sense began to think seriously of her as a wife, he
would require very different qualities from those which please in public
assemblies. Her ladyship fell into a mistake not uncommon in her
sex; she thought that "Love blinds when once he wounds the swain{3}."
Coquettes have sometimes penetration sufficient to see what will please
their different admirers: but even those who have that versatility of
manners, which can be all things to all men, forget that it is possible
to support an assumed character only for a time; the moment the
immediate motive for dissimulation diminishes, the power of habit acts,
and the real disposition and manners appear.

{Footnote 3: Collius's Eclogues.}

When Lady Augusta thought herself sure of her captive, and consequently
when the power of habit was beginning to act with all its wonted
force, she was walking out with him in a shrubbery near the house, and
mademoiselle, with Mr. Dashwood, who generally was the gallant partner
of her walks, accompanied them. Mademoiselle stopped to gather some fine
carnations; near the carnations was a rose-tree. Mr. Mountague, as three
of those roses, one of them in full blow, one half blown, and another a
pretty bud, caught his eye, recollected a passage in Berkeley's romance
of _Gaudentio di Lucca_. "Did you ever happen to meet with Gaudentio di
Lucca? do you recollect the story of Berilla, Lady Augusta?" said he.

"No; I have never heard of Berilla: what is the story?" said she.

"I wish I had the book," said Mr. Mountague; "I cannot do it justice,
but I will borrow it for you from Miss Helen Temple. I lent it to her
some time ago; I dare say she has finished reading it."

At these words, Lady Augusta's desire to have Gaudentio di Lucca
suddenly increased; and she expressed vast curiosity to know the story
of Berilla. "And pray what put you in mind of this book just now?" said
she.

"These roses. In Berkeley's Utopia, which he calls Mezzorania--(every
philosopher, you know, Mr. Dashwood, must have a Utopia, under whatever
name he pleases to call it)--in Mezzorania, Lady Augusta, gentlemen did
not, as amongst us, make declarations of love by artificial words, but
by natural flowers{4}. The lover in the beginning of his attachment
declared it to his mistress by the offer of an opening bud; if she felt
favourably inclined towards him, she accepted and wore the bud. When
time had increased his affection--for in Mezzorania it is supposed that
time increases affection for those that deserve it--the lover presented
a half-blown flower; and, after this also was graciously accepted, he
came, we may suppose not very long afterwards, with a full-blown flower,
the emblem of mature affection. The ladies who accepted these full-blown
flowers, and wore them, were looked upon amongst the simple Mezzoranians
as engaged for life; nor did the gentlemen, when they offered their
flowers, make one single protestation or vow of eternal love, yet they
were believed, and deserved, it is said, to be believed."

{Footnote 4: Gaudentio di Lucca, p. 202.}

"_Qu'est ce que c'est? Qu'est ce que c'est?_" repeated mademoiselle
several times to Dashwood, whilst Mr. Mountague was speaking: she did
not understand English sufficiently to comprehend him, and Dashwood was
obliged to make the thing intelligible to her in French. Whilst he
was occupied with her, Mr. Mountague gathered three roses, a bud, a
half-blown and a full-blown rose, and playfully presented them to Lady
Augusta for her choice.--"I'm dying to see this Gaudentio di Lucca;
you'll get the book for me to-morrow from Miss Helen Temple, will you?"
said Lady Augusta, as she with a coquettish smile took the rose-bud, and
put it into her bosom.

"_Bon!_" cried mademoiselle, stooping to pick up the full-blown rose,
which Mr. Mountague threw away carelessly. "_Bon!_ but it is great pity
dis should be thrown away."

"It is not thrown away upon Mlle. Panache!" said Dashwood.

"Dat maybe," said mademoiselle; "but I observe, wid all your fine
compliment, you let me stoop to pick it up for myself--_á l'Anglaise!_"

"_A la Française_, then," said Dashwood, laughing, "permit me to put it
into your nosegay."

"Dat is more dan you deserve," replied mademoiselle.--"_Eh! non, non_.
I can accommodate it, I tell you, to my own taste best." She settled
and resettled the flower: but suddenly she stopped, uttered a piercing
shriek, plucked the full-blown rose from her bosom, and threw it upon
the ground with a theatrical look of horror. A black earwig now appeared
creeping out of the rose; it was running away, but mademoiselle pursued,
set her foot upon it, and crushed it to death. "Oh! I hope to Heaven,
Mr. Mountague, there are none of these vile creatures in the bud you've
given me!" exclaimed Lady Augusta. She looked at her bud as she spoke,
and espied upon one of the leaves a small green caterpillar: with a look
scarcely less theatrical than mademoiselle's, she tore off the leaf and
flung it from her; then, from habitual imitation of her governess, she
set her foot upon the harmless caterpillar, and crushed it in a moment.

In the same moment Lady Augusta's whole person seemed metamorphosed to
the eyes of her lover. She ceased to be beautiful: he seemed to see her
countenance distorted by malevolence; he saw in her gestures disgusting
cruelty; and all the graces vanished.

When Lady Augusta was a girl of twelve years old, she saw Mlle. Panache
crush a spider to death without emotion: the lesson on humanity was
not lost upon her. From imitation, she learned her governess's foolish
terror of insects; and from example, she was also taught that species of
cruelty, by which at eighteen she disgusted a man of humanity who was in
love with her. Mr. Mountague said not one word upon the occasion. They
walked on. A few minutes after the caterpillar had been crushed, Lady
Augusta exclaimed, "Why, mademoiselle, what have you done with Fanfan? I
thought my dog was with us: for Heaven's sake, where is he?"

"He is run, he is run on," replied mademoiselle.

"Oh, he'll be lost! he'll run down the avenue, quite out upon the
turnpike road.--Fanfan! Fanfan!"

"Don't alarm, don't distress yourself," cried Dashwood: "if your
ladyship will permit me, I'll see for Fanfan instantly, and bring her
back to you, if she is to be found in the universe."

"O Lord! don't trouble yourself; I only spoke to mademoiselle, who
regularly loses Fanfan when she takes him out with her." Dashwood set
out in search of the dog; and Lady Augusta, overcome with affectation,
professed herself unable to walk one yard further, and sank down upon a
seat under a tree, in a very graceful, languid attitude. Mr. Mountague
stood silent beside her. Mademoiselle went on with a voluble defence
of her conduct towards Fanfan, which lasted till Dashwood reappeared,
hurrying towards them with the dog in his arms--"_Ah, la voilà! chère_
Fanfan!" exclaimed mademoiselle.

"I am sure I really am excessively obliged to Mr. Dashwood, I must say,"
cried Lady Augusta, looking reproachfully at Mr. Mountague.

Dashwood now approached with panting, breathless eagerness, announcing
a terrible misfortune, that Fanfan had got a thorn or something in his
fore-foot. Lady Augusta received Fanfan upon her lap, with expressions
of the most tender condolence; and Dashwood knelt down at her feet to
sympathize in her sorrow, and to examine the dog's paw. Mademoiselle
produced a needle to extract the thorn.

"I wish we had a magnifying-glass," said Dashwood, looking with strained
solicitude at the wound.

"Oh, you insensible monster! positively you shan't touch Fanfan," cried
Lady Augusta, guarding her lapdog from Mr. Mountague, who stooped now,
for the first time, to see what was the matter. "Don't touch him, I say;
I would not trust him to you for the universe; I know you hate lapdogs.
You'll kill him--you'll kill him."

"I kill him! Oh no," said Mr. Mountague; "I would not even kill a
caterpillar."

Lady Augusta coloured at these words; but she recovered herself when
Dashwood laughed, and asked Mr. Mountague how long it was since he had
turned brahmin; and how long since he had professed to like caterpillars
and earwigs.

"_Bon Dieu!_--earwig!" interrupted mademoiselle: "is it possible that
monsieur or any body dat has sense, can like _dose_ earwig?"

"I do not remember," answered Mr. Mountague, calmly, "ever to have
professed any _liking_ for earwigs."

"Well, _pity_; you profess pity for them," said Mr. Dashwood, "and pity,
you know, is 'akin to love.'--Pray, did your ladyship ever hear of the
man who had a pet toad?"{5}

{Footnote 5: Vide Smellie's Natural History, vol. ii.}

"Oh, the odious wretch!" cried Lady Augusta, affectedly; "but how could
the man bring himself to like a toad?"

"He began by _pitying_ him, I suppose," said Dashwood. "For my part, I
own I must consider that man to be in a most enviable situation whose
heart is sufficiently at ease to sympathize with the insect creation."

"Or with the brute creation," said Mr. Mountague, smiling and looking
at Fanfan, whose paw Dashwood was at this instant nursing with infinite
tenderness.

"Oh, gentlemen, let us have no more of this, for Heaven's sake!" said
Lady Augusta, interposing, with affected anxiety, as if she imagined
a quarrel would ensue. "Poor dear Fanfan, you would not have any body
quarrel about you, would you, Fanfan?" She rose as she spoke, and,
delivering the dog to Dashwood to be carried home, she walked towards
the house, with an air of marked displeasure towards Mr. Mountague.

Her ladyship's displeasure did not affect him as she expected. Her
image--her gesture stamping upon the caterpillar, recurred to her
lover's mind many times in the course of the evening; and in the silence
of the night, and whenever the idea of her came into his mind, it was
attended with this picture of active cruelty.

"Has your ladyship," said Mr. Mountague, addressing himself to Lady
S----, "any commands for Mrs. Temple? I am going to ride over to see her
this morning."

Lady S---- said that she would trouble him with a card for Mrs. Temple;
a card of invitation for the ensuing week. "And pray don't forget my
kindest remembrances," cried Lady Augusta, "especially to Miss Helen
Temple; and if she should have entirely finished the book we were
talking of, I shall be glad to see it."

When Mr. Mountague arrived at Mrs. Temple's, he was shown into the usual
sitting-room: the servant told him that none of the ladies were at home,
but that they would soon return, he believed, from their walk, as they
were gone only to a cottage at about half a mile's distance.

The room in which he had passed so many agreeable hours awakened in his
mind a number of dormant associations--work, books, drawing, writing! he
saw every thing had been going forward just as usual in his absence. All
the domestic occupations, thought he, which make _home_ delightful, are
here: I see nothing of these at S---- Hall. Upon the table, near a
neat work-basket, which he knew to be Helen's, lay an open book; it was
Gaudentio di Lucca. Mr. Mountague recollected the bud he had given to
Lady Augusta, and he began to whistle, but not for want of thought. A
music-book on the desk of the piano-forte caught his eye; it was open at
a favourite lesson of his, which he remembered to have heard Helen play
the last evening he was in her company. Helen was no great proficient
in music; but she played agreeably enough to please her friends, and she
was not ambitious of exhibiting her accomplishments. Lady Augusta,
on the contrary, seemed never to consider her accomplishments as
occupations, but as the means of attracting admiration. To interrupt the
comparison, which Mr. Mountague was beginning to enter into between her
ladyship and Helen, he thought the best thing he could do was to walk
to meet Mrs. Temple; wisely considering, that putting the body in motion
sometimes stops the current of the mind. He had at least observed,
that his schoolfellow, Lord George ----, seemed to find this a specific
against thought; and for once he was willing to imitate his lordship's
example, and to hurry about from place to place, without being in a
hurry. He rang the bell, inquired in haste which way the ladies were
gone, and walked after them, like a man who had the business of the
nation upon his hands; yet he slackened his pace when he came near the
cottage where he knew that he was to meet Mrs. Temple and her daughters.
When he entered the cottage, the first object that he saw was Helen,
sitting by the side of a decrepit old woman, who was resting her head
upon a crutch, and who seemed to be in pain. This was the poor woman who
had been ridden over by Lady Di. Spanker. A farmer who lived near Mrs.
Temple, and who was coming homewards at the time the accident happened,
had the humanity to carry the wretched woman to this cottage, which was
occupied by one of Mrs. Temple's tenants. As soon as the news reached
her, she sent for a surgeon, and went with her daughters to give that
species of consolation which the rich and happy can so well bestow upon
the poor and Miserable--the consolation not of gold, but of sympathy.

There was no affectation, no ostentation of sensibility, Mr. Mountague
observed, in this cottage scene; the ease and simplicity of Helen's
manner never appeared to him more amiable. He recollected Lady Augusta's
picturesque attitude, when she was speaking to this old woman's
grand-daughter; but there was something in what he now beheld that gave
him more the idea of nature and reality: he heard, he saw, that much had
actually been _done_ to relieve distress, and done when there were no
spectators to applaud or admire. Slight circumstances show whether the
mind be intent upon self or not. An awkward servant girl brushed by
Helen whilst she was speaking to the old woman, and with a great black
kettle, which she was going to set upon the fire, blackened Helen's
white dress, in a manner which no lady intent upon her personal
appearance could have borne with patience. Mr. Mountague saw the black
streaks before Helen perceived them, and when the maid was reproved for
her carelessness, Helen's good-natured smile assured her "that there was
no great harm done."

When they returned home, Mr. Mountague found that Helen conversed with
him with all her own ingenuous freedom, but there was something more of
softness and dignity, and less of sprightliness, than formerly in
her manner. Even this happened to be agreeable to him, for it was
in contrast with the constant appearance of effort and artificial
brilliancy conspicuous in the manners of Lady Augusta. The constant
round of cards and company, the noise and bustle at S---- Hall, made it
more like town than country life, and he had often observed that, in
the intervals between dressing, and visiting, and gallantry, his fair
mistress was frequently subject to _ennui_. He recollected that, in the
many domestic hours he had spent at Mrs. Temple's, he had never beheld
this French demon, who makes the votaries of dissipation and idleness
his victims. What advantage has a man, in judging of female character,
who can see a woman in the midst of her own family, "who can read her
history" in the eyes of those who know her most intimately, who can
see her conduct as a daughter and a sister, and in the most important
relations of life can form a certain judgment from what she has been, of
what she is likely to be? But how can a man judge what sort of wife he
may probably expect in a lady, whom he meets with only at public places,
or whom he never sees even at her own house, without all the advantages
or disadvantages of _stage decoration_? A man who marries a showy,
entertaining coquette, and expects that she will make him a charming
companion for life, commits as absurd a blunder as that of the
famous nobleman, who, delighted with the wit and humour of Punch at
a puppet-show, bought Punch, and ordered him to be sent home for his
private amusement.

Whether all or any of these reflections occurred to Mr. Mountague during
his morning visit at Mrs. Temple's we cannot pretend to say; but
his silence and absence seemed to show that his thoughts were busily
engaged. Never did Helen appear to him so amiable as she did this
morning, when the dignity, delicacy, and simplicity of her manners were
contrasted in his imagination with the caprice and coquetry of his
new mistress. He felt a secret idea that he was beloved, and a sober
certainty that Helen had a heart capable of sincere and permanent
affection, joined to a cultivated understanding and reasonable
principles, which would wear through life, and ensure happiness, with
power superior to the magic of passion.

It was with some difficulty that he asked Helen for Gaudentio di Lucca,
and with yet greater difficulty that he took leave of her. As he was
riding towards S---- Hall, "revolving in his altered mind the various
turns of fate below," he was suddenly roused from his meditations by the
sight of a phaeton overturned in the middle of the road, another phaeton
and four empty, and a group of people gathered near a bank by the
road-side. Mr. Mountague rode up as fast as possible to the scene of
action: the overturned phaeton was Lord George's, the other Lady Di.
Spanker's; the group of people was composed of several servants, Lord
George, Lady Di., and mademoiselle, all surrounding a fainting fair one,
who was no other than Lady Augusta herself. Lord George was shaking his
own arms, legs, and head, to make himself sure of their safety. Lady Di.
eagerly told the whole story to Mr. Mountague, that Lord George had been
running races with her, and by his confounded bad driving had overturned
himself and Lady Augusta. "Poor thing, she's not hurt at all, luckily;
but she's terrified to death, as usual, and she has been going from one
fainting fit to another."

"_Bon Dieu!_" interrupted mademoiselle; "but what will Miladi S---- say
to us? I wish Miladi Augusta would come to her senses."

Lady Augusta opened her beautiful eyes, and, just come sufficiently
to her senses to observe who was looking at her, she put aside
mademoiselle's smelling-bottle, and, in a soft voice, begged to have her
own salts. Mademoiselle felt in one of her ladyship's pockets for the
salts in vain: Lady Di. plunged her hand into her other pocket, and
pulled out, in the first place, a book, which she threw upon the bank,
and then came out the salts. In due time the lady was happily restored
to the full use of her senses, and was put into her mother's coach,
which had been sent for to convey her home. The carriages drove away,
and Mr. Mountague was just mounting his horse, when he saw the book
which had been pulled out of Lady Augusta's pocket, and which, by
mistake, was left where it had been thrown upon the grass. What was his
astonishment, when upon opening it, he saw one of the very worst books
in the French language; a book which never could have been found in the
possession of any woman of delicacy--of decency. Her lover stood for
some minutes in silent amazement, disgust, and, we may add, terror.

These feelings had by no means subsided in his mind, when, upon his
entering the drawing-room at S---- Hall, he was accosted by Mlle.
Panache, who, with no small degree of alarm in her countenance, inquired
whether he knew any thing of the book which had been left upon the road.
No one was in the room but the governess and her pupil. Mr. Mountague
produced the book, and Lady Augusta received it with a deep blush.

"Put a good face upon the matter at least," whispered her governess in
French.

"I can assure you," said her ladyship, "I don't know what's in this
book; I never opened it; I got it this morning at the circulating
library at Cheltenham: I put it into my pocket in a hurry--pray what is
it?"

"If you have not opened it," said Mr. Mountague, laying his hand upon
the book; "I may hope that you never will--but this is the _second_
volume."

"May be so," said Lady Augusta; "I suppose, in my hurry, I mistook--"

"She never had the first, I can promise you," cried mademoiselle.

"Never," said Lady Augusta. The assertions had not the power to
convince; they were pronounced with much vehemence, but not with the
simplicity of truth. Mr. Mountague was determined to have the point
cleared up; and he immediately offered to ride back to Cheltenham, and
return the second volume. At this proposal, Lady Augusta, who foresaw
that her falsehood would be detected, turned pale; but mademoiselle,
with a laugh of effrontery, which she thought was putting a good face
upon the matter, exclaimed,

"Eh! listen to me--you may spare yourself de trouble of your ride," said
she, "for the truth is, I have de first volume. _Mon Dieu!_ I have not
committed murder--do not look so shock--what signify what I read at my
age?"

"But Lady Augusta, your pupil!" said Mr. Mountague.

"I tell you she has never read one word of it; and, after all, is she
child now? When she was, Miladi S---- was very particular, and I, of
consequence and of course, in de choice of her books; but now, _oder
affaire_, she is at liberty, and my maxim is--_Tout est sain aux
sains_."

Mr. Mountague's indignation was now strongly raised against this odious
governess, and he looked upon her pupil with an eye of compassion. "So
early, so young, tainted by the pernicious maxims of a worthless woman!"

"Eh, _donc_, what signify your silence and your salts?" cried
mademoiselle, turning to her.

"If I could be spared this scene at present," said Lady Augusta,
faintly--"I really am not well. We had better talk over this business
some other time, Mr. Mountague:" to this he acceded, and the lady gained
more by her salts and silence than her governess did by her garrulous
effrontery.

When she talked over the business with Mr. Mountague, she threw all the
blame upon mademoiselle, and she appeared extremely shocked and alarmed
at the idea that she had lessened herself by her _folly_, as she called
it, in the esteem of a man of superior sense and taste. It was perhaps
possible that, at this moment of her life, her character might have
taken a new turn, that she might really have been awakened to higher
views and nobler sentiments than any she had ever yet known; but the
baleful influence of her constant attendant and conductress prevailed
against her _better self_. Mademoiselle continually represented to
her, that she did not know or exert the whole of her power over Mr.
Mountague; and she excited her to caprice and coquetry. The fate of
trifling characters is generally decided by trifles: we must beg leave
to relate the important history of a turban.

Mlle. Panache, who piqued herself much upon her skill as a milliner,
made up a certain turban for Lady Augusta, which Dashwood admired
extremely, but which Mr. Mountague had the misfortune not to think
perfectly beautiful. Vexed that he should dare to differ from her in
taste, Lady Augusta could not rest without endeavouring to make him give
up his opinion: he thought that it was not worth while to dispute about
a trifle; and though he could not absolutely say that it was pretty, he
condescended so far as to allow that it might perhaps be pretty, if it
were put on differently.

"This is the way I always wear it--every body wears it so--and I shall
not alter it," said Lady Augusta, who was quite out of temper.

Mr. Mountague looked grave: the want of temper was an evil which he
dreaded beyond measure in a companion for life. Smiles and dimples
usually adorned Lady Augusta's face; but these were artificial smiles:
now passions, which one should scarcely imagine such a trifle could
excite, darkened her brow, and entirely altered the air of her whole
person, so as to make it absolutely disagreeable to her admirer. Lord
George, who was standing by, and who felt delighted with such scenes,
winked at Dashwood, and, with more energy than he usually expressed upon
any subject, now pronounced that, in his humble opinion, the turban was
quite the thing, and could not be better put on. Lady Augusta turned a
triumphant, insulting eye upon Mr. Mountague: he was silent--his silence
she took as a token of submission--in fact, it was an expression of
contempt. The next day, at dinner, her ladyship appeared in the same
turban, put on sedulously in the same manner. Lord George seated himself
beside her; and as she observed that he paid her unusual attention, she
fancied that at length his icy heart would thaw. Always more intent
upon making cages{6}, Lady Augusta bent her mind upon captivating a new
admirer. Mr. Mountague she saw was displeased, but she now really
felt and showed herself indifferent to his opinion. How variable, how
wretched, is the life of a coquette! The next day Lord George's heart
froze again as hard as ever, and Lady Augusta lightened upon the
impassive ice in vain. She was mortified beyond measure, for her grand
object was conquest. That she might triumph over poor Helen, she had
taken pains to attract Mr. Mountague. Dashwood, though far beneath her
ladyship in fortune and in station, she deemed worth winning, as a man
of wit and gallantry. Lord George, to be sure, had little wit, and less
gallantry; but he was Lord George, and that was saying enough. In short,
Lady Augusta exacted tribute to her vanity without any discrimination,
and she valued her treasures by number, and not by weight. A man of
sense is mortified to see himself confounded with the stupid and the
worthless.

{Footnote 6: Swift}

Mr. Mountague, after having loved like a madman, felt it not in the
least incumbent upon him to love like a fool; he had imprudently
declared himself an admirer of Lady Augusta, but he now resolved
never to unite himself to her without some more reasonable prospect
of happiness. Every day some petty cause of disagreement arose between
them, whilst mademoiselle, by her silly and impertinent interference,
made matters worse. Mademoiselle had early expressed her strong
abhorrence of prudes; her pupil seemed to have caught the same
abhorrence; she saw that Mr. Mountague was alarmed by her spirit of
coquetry, yet still it continued in full force. For instance, she would
continually go out with Lord George in his phaeton, though she declared,
every time he handed her in, "that she was certain he would break her
neck." She would receive verses from Dashwood, and keep them embalmed in
her pocket-book, though she allowed that she thought them "sad stuff."

However, in these verses something more was meant than met the ear. He
began with addressing a poem to her ladyship, called The Turban, which
her silly mother extolled with eagerness, and seemed to think by no
means inferior to the Rape of the Lock. Lady Augusta wrote a few lines
in answer to the Turban--reply produced reply--nonsense, nonsense--till
Dashwood now and then forgot his poetical character. Lady Augusta
forgave it; he, of course, forgot himself again into a lover in prose.
For some time the sonnets were shown to Lady S----, but at length some
were received, which it was thought as well not to show to any body. In
short, between fancy, flattery, poetry, passion, jest, and earnest, Lady
Augusta was drawn on till she hardly knew where she was; but Dashwood
knew perfectly well where he was, and resolved to keep his ground
resolutely.

When encouraged by the lady's coquetry, he first formed his plans; he
imagined that a promise of a wedding-present would easily secure her
governess: but this was a slight mistake; avarice happened not to be
the ruling, or, at least at this time, the reigning passion of
mademoiselle's mind; and quickly perceiving his error, he paid assiduous
court to her vanity. She firmly believed that she had captivated him,
and was totally blind to his real designs. The grand difficulty with
Dashwood was, not to persuade her of his passion, but to prevent her
from believing him too soon; and he thought it expedient to delay
completing his conquest of the governess till he had gained an equally
powerful influence over her pupil. One evening, Dashwood, passing
through a sheltered walk, heard Lady Augusta and Mr. Mountague talking
very loudly and eagerly: they passed through the grove so quickly that
he could catch only the words "phaeton--imprudence."

"Pshaw! jealousy--nonsense."

"Reasonable woman for a wife."

"Pooh, no such thing."

"My unalterable resolution," were the concluding words of Mr. Mountague,
in a calm but decided voice; and, "As you please, sir! I've no notion of
giving up my will in every thing," the concluding words of Lady Augusta
pronounced in a pettish tone, as she broke from him; yet pausing for
a moment, Dashwood, to his great surprise and concern, heard her in a
softer tone add a _but_, which showed she was not quite willing to break
from Mr. Mountague for ever. Dashwood was alarmed beyond measure; but
the lady did not long continue in this frame of mind, for, upon going
into her dressing-room to rest herself, she found her governess at the
glass.

"_Bon Dieu!_" exclaimed mademoiselle, turning round: "Miladi told me you
was gone out--_mais qu'est ce que c'est? vous voilà pâle_--you are as
white--_blanc comme mon linge_," cried she, with emphasis, at the same
time touching a handkerchief, which was so far from white, that her
pupil could not help bursting out into a laugh at the unfortunate
illustration. "_Pauvre petite! tenez_," continued mademoiselle, running
up to her with salts, apprehensive that she was going into fits.

"I am not ill, thank you," said Lady Augusta, taking the smelling
bottle.

"But don't tell me dat," said mademoiselle: "I saw you walking out of de
window wid dat man, and I know dis is some new _démêlé_ wid him. Come,
_point de secret, mon enfant_. Has not he being giving you one good
lecture?"

"Lecture!" said Lady Augusta, rising with becoming spirit: "no,
mademoiselle, I am not to be lectured by any body."

"No, to be sure; dat is what I say, and, _surtout_, not by a lover.
_Quel homme!_ why I would not have him to pay his court to me for all de
world. Why, _pauvre petite_, he has made you look ten years older ever
since he began to fall in love wid you. Dis what you call a lover in
England? _Bon_, why, I know noting of de matter, if he be one bit in
love wid you, _mon enfant_."

"Oh, as to that, he certainly is in love with me: whatever other faults
he has, I must do him that justice."

"_Justice!_ Oh, let him have justice, _de tout mon caeur_; but I say, if
he be a man in love, he is de oddest man in love I ever happen to see;
he eat, drink, sleep, talk, laugh, _se possede tout comme un autre.
Bon Dieu!_ I would not give noting at all _myself_ for such a sort of
a lover. _Mon enfant_, dis is not de way I would wish to see you loved;
dis is not de way no man ought for to dare for to love you."

"And how ought I to be loved?" asked Lady Augusta, impatiently.

"_La belle question!_ Eh! don't every body, de stupidest person in
de world, know how dey ought to be love? _Mais passionnément,
éperdument_--dere is a--a _je ne sais quoi_ dat infailliblement
distinguish de true lover from de false."

"Then," said Lady Augusta, "you really don't think that Mr. Mountague
loves me?"

"Tink!" replied mademoiselle, "I don't tink about it; but have not I
said enough? Open your eyes; make your own _comparaisons_."

Before Lady Augusta had made her comparisons, a knock at the door from
her maid came to let her know that Lord George was waiting.

"Ah! milord George! I won't keep you den: _va t'en_."

"But now, do you know, it was only because I just said that I was going
out with Lord George that Mr. Mountague made all this rout."

"Den let him make his rout; _qu'importe? Miladi votre chère mère_ make
no objections. _Quelle impertinence!_ If he was milord duc he could not
give himself no more airs. _Va, man enfant_--Dis a lover! _Quel homme,
quel tyran!_ and den, of course, when he grows to be a husband, he will
be worserer and worserer, and badderer and badderer, when he grows to be
your husband."

"Oh," cried Lady Augusta, snatching up her gloves hastily, "my husband
he shall never be, I am determined. So now I'll give him his _coup de
grace_."

"_Bon!_" said mademoiselle, following her pupil, "and I must not miss to
be by, for I shall love to see dat man mortify."

"You _are_ going then?" said Mr. Mountague, gravely, as she passed.

"Going, going, going, gone!" cried Lady Augusta, who, tripping
carelessly by, gave her hand to the sulky lord; then springing into the
phaeton, said as usual--"I know, my lord, you'll break my neck;" at the
same time casting a look at Mr. Mountague, which seemed to say--"I hope
you'll break _your heart_, at least."

When she returned from her airing, the first glance at Mr. Mountague's
countenance convinced her that her power was at an end. She was not the
only person who observed this. Dashwood, under his air of thoughtless
gaiety, watched all that passed with the utmost vigilance, and he knew
how to avail himself of every circumstance that could be turned to
his own advantage. He well knew that a lady's ear is never so happily
prepared for the voice of flattery as after having been forced to hear
that of sincerity. Dashwood contrived to meet Lady Augusta, just after
she had been mortified by her late admirer's total recovery of his
liberty, and, seizing well his moment, pressed his suit with gallant
ardour. As he exhibited all those signs of passion which her governess
would have deemed unequivocal, the young lady thought herself justified
in not absolutely driving him to despair.

Where was Lady S---- all this time! Where?--at the card-table, playing
very judiciously at whist. With an indolent security, which will be
thought incredible by those who have not seen similar instances of folly
in great families, she let every thing pass before her eyes without
seeing it. Confident that her daughter, after having gone through the
usual routine, would meet with some suitable establishment, that the
settlements would then be the father's business, the choice of the
jewels hers, she left her dear Augusta, in the meantime, to conduct
herself; or, what was ten times worse, to be conducted by Mlle. Panache.
Thus to the habitual indolence, or temporary convenience of parents,
are the peace and reputation of a family secretly sacrificed. And we may
observe, that those who take the least precaution to prevent imprudence
in their children are most enraged and implacable when the evil becomes
irremediable.

In losing Mr. Mountague's heart, Lady Augusta's vanity felt a double
pang, from the apprehension that Helen would probably recover her
captive. Acting merely from the impulse of the moment, her ladyship was
perfectly a child in her conduct; she seldom knew her own mind two hours
together, and really did not foresee the consequences of any one of her
actions. Half a dozen incompatible wishes filled her heart, or, rather,
her imagination. The most immediate object of vanity had always the
greatest power over her; and upon this habit of mind Dashwood calculated
with security.

In the pride of conquest, her ladyship had rejoiced at her mother's
inviting Mrs. Temple and her daughters to an entertainment at S----
Hall, where she flattered herself that Mr. Mountague would appear as her
declared admirer. The day, alas! came; but things had taken a new turn,
and Lady Augusta was as impatient that the visit should be finished,
as she had been eager to have the invitation sent. Lady S---- was not
precisely informed of all that was going on in her own house, as we
have observed; and she was, therefore, a little surprised at the look of
vexation with which her daughter heard that she had pressed Mrs. Temple
to stay all night. "My dear," said Lady S----, "you know you can sleep
in mademoiselle's room for this one night, and Miss Helen Temple will
have yours. One should be civil to people, especially when one sees
them but seldom." Lady Augusta was much out of humour with her mother's
ill-timed civility; but there was no remedy. In the hurry of moving her
things at night, Lady Augusta left in her dressing table drawer a letter
of Dashwood's--a letter which she would not have had seen by Miss
Helen Temple for any consideration. Our readers may imagine what her
ladyship's consternation must have been, when, the next morning, Helen
put the letter into her hand, saying, "There's a paper you left in your
dressing-table, Lady Augusta." The ingenuous countenance of Helen, as
she spoke, might have convinced any one but Lady Augusta that she
was incapable of having opened this paper; but her ladyship judged
otherwise: she had no doubt that every syllable of the letter had been
seen, and that her secret would quickly be divulged. The company had not
yet assembled at breakfast. She retired precipitately to her own room,
to consider what could possibly be done in this emergency. She at length
resolved to apply to Mr. Mountague for assistance; for she had seen
enough of him to feel assured that he was a man of honour, and that she
might safely trust him. When she heard him go down stairs to breakfast,
she followed, and contrived to give him a note, which he read with no
small degree of surprise.

"How to apologize for myself I know not, nor have I one moment's time
to deliberate. Believe me, I feel my sensibility and delicacy severely
wounded; but an ill-fated, uncontrollable passion must plead my excuse.
I candidly own that my conduct must appear to you in a strange light;
but spare me, I beseech you, all reproaches, and pardon my weakness, for
on your generosity and honour must I rely, in this moment of distress.

"A letter of mine--a fatal letter from Dashwood--has fallen into the
hands of Miss Helen Temple. All that I hold most dear is at her mercy. I
am fully persuaded that, were she to promise to keep my secret, nothing
on earth would tempt her to betray me; but I know she has so much the
habit of speaking of every thing to her mother, that I am in torture
till this promise is obtained. Your influence I must depend upon. Speak
to her, I conjure you, the moment breakfast is over; and assure yourself
of my unalterable gratitude.

"AUGUSTA ----."

The moment breakfast was over, Mr. Mountague followed Helen into the
library; a portfolio, full of prints, lay open on the table, and as he
turned them over, he stopped at a print of Alexander putting his seal
to the lips of Hephaestion, whom he detected reading a letter over
his shoulder. Helen, as he looked at the print, said she admired the
delicacy of Alexander's reproof to his friend; but observed, that it was
scarcely probable the seal should bind Hephsestion's lips.

"How so?" said Mr. Mountague, eagerly.

"Because," said Helen, "if honour could not restrain his curiosity, it
would hardly secure his secrecy."

"Charming girl!" exclaimed Mr. Mountague, with enthusiasm. Helen, struck
with surprise, and a variety of emotions, coloured deeply. "I beg your
pardon," said Mr. Mountague, changing his tone, "for being so abrupt.
You found a letter of Lady Augusta's last night. She is in great, I am
sure needless, anxiety about it."

"Needless, indeed; I did not think it necessary to assure Lady Augusta,
when I returned her letter, that I had not read it. I gave it her
because I thought she would not like to have an open letter left where
it might fall into the hands of servants. As she has mentioned this
subject to you, I hope, sir, you will persuade her of the truth; you
seem to be fully convinced of it yourself."

"I am, indeed, fully convinced of your integrity, of the generosity, the
simplicity of your mind. May I ask whether you formed any conjecture,
whether you know whom that letter was from?"

Helen, with an ingenuous look, replied--"Yes, sir, I did form a
conjecture--I thought it was from you."

"From me!" exclaimed Mr. Mountague. "I must undeceive you there: the
letter was not mine. I am eager," continued he, smiling, "to undeceive
you. I wish I might flatter myself this explanation could ever be half
as interesting to you as it is to me. That letter was not mine, and I
can never, in future, be on any other terms with Lady Augusta than those
of a common acquaintance."

Here they were interrupted by the sudden entrance of mademoiselle,
followed by Dashwood, to whom she was talking with great earnestness.
Mr. Mountague, when he had collected his thoughts sufficiently to think
of Lady Augusta, wrote the following answer to her letter:--

"Your ladyship may be perfectly at ease with respect to your note. Miss
Helen Temple has not read it, nor has she, I am convinced, the slightest
suspicion of its contents or its author. I beg leave to assure your
ladyship, that I am sensible of the honour of your confidence, and
that you shall never have any reason to repent of having trusted in my
discretion. Yet permit me, even at the hazard of appearing impertinent,
at the still greater hazard of incurring your displeasure, to express my
most earnest hope that nothing will tempt you to form a connexion, which
I am persuaded would prove fatal to the happiness of your future life. I
am, with much respect, Your ladyship's obedient servant, F. MOUNTAGUE."

Lady Augusta read this answer to her note with the greatest eagerness:
the first time she ran her eye over it, joy, to find her secret yet
undiscovered, suspended every other feeling; but, upon a second perusal,
her ladyship felt extremely displeased by the cold civility of the
style, and somewhat alarmed at the concluding paragraph. With no esteem,
and little affection for Dashwood, she had suffered herself to imagine
that her passion for him was _uncontrollable_.

What degree of felicity she was likely to enjoy with a man destitute
equally of fortune and principle, she had never attempted to calculate;
but there was something awful in the words--"I earnestly hope that
nothing will tempt you to form a connexion which would prove fatal
to your future happiness." Whilst she was pondering upon these words,
Dashwood met her in the park, where she was walking alone. "Why so
grave?" exclaimed he, with anxiety.

"I am only thinking--that--I am afraid--I think this is a silly
business: I wish, Mr. Dashwood, you wouldn't think any more of it, and
give me back my letters."

Dashwood vehemently swore that her letters were dearer to him than life,
and that the "last pang should tear them from his heart."

"But, if we go on with all this," resumed Lady Augusta, "it will at
least break my mother's heart, and mademoiselle's into the bargain;
besides, I don't half believe you; I really--"

"I really, what?" cried he, pouring forth protestations of passion,
which put Mr. Mountague's letter entirely out of her head.

A number of small motives sometimes decide the mind in the most
important actions of our lives; and faults are often attributed to
passion which arise from folly. The pleasure of duping her governess,
the fear of witnessing Helen's triumph over her lover's recovered
affections, and the idea of the bustle and éclat of an elopement, all
mixed together, went under the general denomination of love!--Cupid is
often blamed for deeds in which he has no share.

"But," resumed Lady Augusta, after making the last pause of expiring
prudence, "what shall we do about mademoiselle?"

"Poor mademoiselle!" cried Dashwood, leaning back against a tree to
support himself, whilst he laughed violently--"what do you think she is
about at this instant?--packing up her clothes in a band-box."

"Packing up her clothes in a band-box!"

"Yes; she verily believes that I am dying with impatience to carry her
off to Scotland, and at four o'clock to-morrow morning she trips down
stairs out of the garden-door, of which she keeps the key, flies across
the park, scales the gate, gains the village, and takes refuge with her
good friend, Miss Lacy, the milliner, where she is to wait for me. Now,
in the mean time, the moment the coast is clear, I fly to you, my _real_
angel."

"Oh, no, upon my word," said Lady Augusta, so faintly, that Dashwood
went on exactly in the same tone.

"I fly to you, my angel, and we shall be half way on our trip to
Scotland before mademoiselle's patience is half exhausted, and before
_Miladi_ S---- is quite awake."

Lady Augusta could not forbear smiling at this idea; and thus, by an
_unlucky_ stroke of humour, was the grand event of her life decided.

Marmontel's well-known story, called _Heureusement_, is certainly not
a moral tale: to counteract its effects, he should have written
_Malheureusement_, if he could.

Nothing happened to disconcert the measures of Lady Augusta and
Dashwood.

The next morning Lady S---- came down, according to her usual custom,
late to breakfast. Mrs. Temple, Helen, Emma, Lord George, Mr. Mountague,
&c., were assembled. "Has not mademoiselle made breakfast for us yet?"
said Lady S----. She sat down, and expected every moment to see Mlle.
Panache and her daughter make their appearance; but she waited in vain.
Neither mademoiselle, Lady Augusta, nor Dashwood, were any where to
be found. Every body round the breakfast-table looked at each other in
silence, waiting the event. "They are out walking, I suppose," said Lady
S----, which supposition contented her for the first five minutes; but
then she exclaimed, "It's very strange they don't come back!"

"Very strange--I mean rather strange," said Lord George, helping
himself, as he spoke, to his usual quantity of butter, and then drumming
upon the table; whilst Mr. Mountague, all the time, looked down, and
preserved a profound silence.

At length the door opened, and Mlle. Panache, in a riding habit, made
her appearance. "_Bon jour, miladi! Bon jour!_" said she, looking round
at the silent party, with a half terrified, half astonished countenance.
"_Je vous demande mille pardons--Qu'est ce que c'est?_ I have only been
to take a walk dis morning into de village to de milliner's. She has
disappointed me of my tings, dat kept me waiting; but I am come back in
time for breakfast, I hope?"

"But where is my daughter?" cried Lady S----, roused at last from her
natural indolence--"where is Lady Augusta?"

"_Bon Dieu!_ Miladi, I don't know. _Bon Dieu!_ in her bed, I suppose.
_Bon Dieu!_" exclaimed she a third time, and turned as pale as ashes.
"But where den is Mr. Dashwood?" At this instant a note, directed to
mademoiselle, was brought into the room: the servant said that Lady
Augusta's maid had just found it upon her lady's toilette--mademoiselle
tore open the note.

"Excuse me to my mother--_you_ can best plead my excuse.

"You will not see me again till I am

'Augusta Dashwood.'"

"_Ah scélérat! Ah scélérat! Il m'a trahi!_" screamed mademoiselle: she
threw down the note, and sunk upon the sofa in real hysterics; whilst
Lady S----, seeing in one and the same moment her own folly and her
daughter's ruin, fixed her eyes upon the words "Augusta Dashwood," and
fainted. Mr. Mountague led Lord George out of the room with him, whilst
Mrs. Temple, Helen, and her sister, ran to the assistance of the unhappy
mother and the detected governess.

As soon as mademoiselle had recovered tolerable _composure_, she
recollected that she had betrayed too violent emotion on this occasion.
"_Il m'a trahi_," were words, however, that she could not recall; it was
in vain she attempted to fabricate some apology for herself. No apology
could avail: and whilst Lady S----, in silent anguish, wept for her own
and her daughter's folly, the governess, in loud and gross terms,
abused Dashwood, and reproached her pupil with having shown duplicity,
ingratitude, and a _bad heart_.

"A bad education!" exclaimed Lady S----, with a voice of mingled anger
and sorrow. "Leave the room, mademoiselle; leave my house. How could
I choose such a governess for my daughter! Yet, indeed," added her
ladyship, turning to Mrs. Temple, "she was well recommended to me, and
how could I foresee all this?"

To such an appeal, at such a time, there was no reply to be made: it is
cruel to point out errors to those who feel that they are irreparable;
but it is benevolent to point them out to others, who have yet their
choice to make.



THE KNAPSACK {1}

 {Footnote 1: In the Travels of M. Beanjolin into Sweden, he mentions having, in the year 1790, met carriages laden with the knapsacks of Swedish soldiers, who had fallen in battle in Finland. These carriages were escorted by peasants, who were relieved at every stage, and thus the property of the deceased was conveyed from one extremity of the kingdom to the other, and faithfully restored to their relations. The Swedish peasants are so remarkably honest, that scarcely any thing is ever lost in these convoys of numerous and ill-secured packages.}

_DRAMATIS PERSONAE_

COUNT HELMAAR, _a Swedish Nobleman_. CHRISTIERN, _a Swedish Soldier_.
ALEFTSON, _Count Helmaar's Fool_. THOMAS, _a Footman_.

ELEONORA, _a Swedish Lady, beloved by Count Helmaar_. CHRISTINA,
_Sister to Helmaar_. ULRICA, _an old Housekeeper_. CATHERINE, _Wife to
Christiern_.

KATE _and_ ULRIC, _the Son and Daughter of Catherine--they are six and
seven years old_.

_Serjeant, and a Troop of Soldiers, a Train of Dancers, a Page,
Peasants, &c_.

ACT I.

SCENE--_A cottage in Sweden_.--CATHERINE, _a young and handsome woman,
is sitting at her spinning wheel.--A little Boy and Girl, of six and
seven years of age, are seated on the ground eating their dinner_.

CATHERINE _sings, while she is spinning_.

Haste from the wars, oh, haste to me, The wife that fondly waits for
thee; Long are the years, and long each day, While my loved soldier's
far away. Haste from the wars, &c.

Lone ev'ry field, and lone the bow'r; Pleasant to me nor sun nor show'r:
The snows are gone, the flow'rs are gay--Why is my life of life away?
Haste from the wars, &c.

_Little Girl_. When will father come home?

_Little Boy_. When will he come, mother? when? To-day? to-morrow?

_Cath_. No, not to-day, nor to-morrow, but soon, I hope, very soon; for
they say the wars are over.

_Little Girl_. I am glad of that, and when father comes home, I'll give
him some of my flowers.

_Little Boy (who is still eating)_. And I'll give him some of my bread
and cheese, which he'll like better than flowers, if he is as hungry
as I am, and that to be sure he will be, after coming such a long, long
journey.

_Little Girl_. Long, long journey! how long?--how far is father off,
mother?--where is he?

_Little Boy_. I know, he is in--in--in--in--in Finland? how far off,
mother?

_Cath_. A great many miles, my dear; I don't know how many.

_Little Boy_. Is it not two miles to the great house, mother, where we
go to sell our faggots?

_Cath_. Yes, about two miles--and now you had best set out towards the
great house, and ask Mrs. Ulrica, the housekeeper, to pay you the little
bill she owes you for faggots--there's good children; and when you have
been paid for your faggots, you can call at the baker's, in the village,
and bring home some bread for to-morrow (_patting the little boy's
head_)--you that love bread and cheese so much must work hard to get it.

_Little Boy_. Yes, so I will work hard, then I shall have enough
for myself and father too, when he comes. Come along--come (_to his
sister_)--and, as we come home through the forest, I'll show you where
we can get plenty of sticks for to-morrow, and we'll help one another.

_Little Girl sings_.

That's the best way, At work and at play, To help one another--I heard
mother say--To help one another--I heard mother say--

{_The children go off, singing these words_.}

_Cath. (alone_.) Dear, good children, how happy their father will be to
see them, when he comes back!--(_She begins to eat the remains of the
dinner, which the children have left_.) The little rogue was so hungry,
he has not left me much; but he would have left me all, if he had
thought that I wanted it: he shall have a _good large bowl_ of milk for
supper. It was but last night he skimmed the cream off his milk for me,
because he thought I liked it. Heigho!--God knows how long they may have
milk to skim--as long as I can work they shall never want; but I'm not
so strong as I used to be; but then I shall get strong, and all will be
well, when my husband comes back (_a drum beats at a distance_). Hark!
a drum!--some news from abroad, perhaps--nearer and nearer (_she sinks
upon a chair_)--why cannot I run to see--to ask (_the drum beats louder
and louder_)--fool that I am! they will be gone! they will be all gone!
(_she starts up_.)

{_Exit hastily_.}

SCENE _changes to a high road, leading to a village.--A party of ragged,
tired soldiers, marching slowly. Serjeant ranges them_.

_Serj_. Keep on, my brave fellows, keep on, we have not a great way
further to go:--keep on, my brave fellows, keep on, through yonder
village. (_The drum beats_.)

{_Soldiers exeunt_.}

_Serj_. (_alone_.) Poor fellows, my heart bleeds to see them! the sad
remains, these, of as fine a regiment as ever handled a musket. Ah! I've
seen them march quite another guess sort of way, when they marched,
and I amongst them, to face the enemy--heads up--step firm--thus it
was--quick time--march!--(_he marches proudly_)--My poor fellows, how
they lag now (_looking after them_)--ay, ay, there they go, slower and
slower; they don't like going through the village; nor I neither; for,
at every village we pass through, out come the women and children,
running after us, and crying, "Where's my father?--What's become of my
husband?"--Stout fellow as I am, and a Serjeant too, that ought to know
better, and set the others an example, I can't stand these questions.

_Enter_ CATHERINE, _breathless_.

_Cath_. I--I--I've overtaken him at last. Sir--Mr. Serjeant, one word!
What news from Finland?

_Serj_. The best--the war's over. Peace is proclaimed.

_Cath. (clasping her hands joyfully_.) Peace! happy sound!--Peace! The
war's over!--Peace!--And the regiment of Helmaar--(_The Serjeant appears
impatient to get away_)--Only one word, good serjeant: when will the
regiment of Helmaar be back?

_Serj_. All that remain of it will be home next week.

_Cath_. Next week?--But, all that _remain_, did you say?--Then many have
been killed?

_Serj_. Many, many--too many. Some honest peasants are bringing home the
knapsacks of those who have fallen in battle. 'Tis fair that what little
they had should come home to their families. Now, I pray you, let me
pass on.

_Cath_. One word more: tell me, do you know, in the regiment of Helmaar,
one Christiern Aleftson?

_Serj, (with eagerness_.) Christiern Aleftson! as brave a fellow, and as
good as ever lived, if it be the same that I knew.

_Cath_. As brave a fellow, and as good as ever lived! Oh, that's he! he
is my husband--where is he? where is he?

_Serj, (aside_.) She wrings my heart!--(_Aloud_)--He was--

_Cath_. _Was!_

_Serj_. He is, I hope, safe.

_Cath_. You _hope!_--don't look away--I must see your face: tell me all
you know.

_Serj_. I know nothing for certain. When the peasants come with the
knapsacks, you will hear all from them. Pray you, let me follow my men;
they are already at a great distance.

{_Exit Serj. followed by Catherine_.}

_Cath_. I will not detain you an instant--only one word more--

{_Exit_.}

SCENE.--_An apartment in Count Helmaar's Castle.--A train of
dancers.--After they have danced for some time, _

Enter a Page.

_Page_. Ladies! I have waited, according to your commands, till Count
Helmaar appeared in the ante-chamber--he is there now, along with the
ladies Christina and Eleonora.

_1st Dancer_. Now is our time--Count Helmaar shall hear our song to
welcome him home.

_2nd Dancer_. None was ever more welcome.

_3rd Dancer_. But stay till I have breath to sing.

SONG.

I.

Welcome, Helmaar, welcome home; In crowds your happy neighbours come, To
hail with joy the cheerful morn, That sees their Helmaar's safe return.

II.

No hollow heart, no borrow'd face. Shall ever Helmaar's hall disgrace:
Slaves alone on tyrants wait; Friends surround the good and great.

Welcome Helmaar, &c.

_Enter_ ELEONORA, CHRISTINA, _and_ COUNT HELMAAR.

_Helmaar_. Thanks, my friends, for this kind welcome.

_1st Dancer (looking at a black fillet on Helmaar's head_). He has been
wounded.

_Christina_. Yes--severely wounded.

_Helmaar_. And had it not been for the fidelity of the soldier who
carried me from the field of battle, I should never have seen you more,
my friends, nor you, my charming Eleonora. (_A noise of one singing
behind the scenes_.)--What disturbance is that without?

_Christina_. Tis only Aleftson, the fool:--in your absence, brother,
he has been the cause of great diversion in the castle:--I love to play
upon him, it keeps him in tune;--you can't think how much good it does
him.

_Helmaar_. And how much good it does you, sister:--from your childhood
you had always a lively wit, and loved to exercise it; but do you waste
it upon fools?

_Christina_. I'm sometimes inclined to think this Aleftson is more knave
than fool.

_Eleon_. By your leave, Lady Christina, he is no knave, or I am much
mistaken. To my knowledge, he has carried his whole salary, and all
the little presents he has received from us, to his brother's wife and
children. I have seen him chuck his money, thus, at those poor children,
when they have been at their plays, and then run away, lest their mother
should make them give it back.

_Enter_ ALEFTSON, _the fool, in a fool's coat, fool's cap and bells,
singing_.

I.

There's the courtier, who watches the nod of the great; Who thinks much
of his pension, and nought of the state: When for ribands and titles his
honour he sells--What is he, my friends, but a fool without bells?

II.

There's the gamester, who stakes on the turn of a die His house and
his acres, the devil knows why: His acres he loses, his forests he
sells--What is he, my friends, but a fool without bells?

III.

There's the student so crabbed and wonderful wise, With his plus and
his minus, his x's and y's: Pale at midnight he pores o'er his magical
spells--What is he, my friends, but a fool without bells?

IV.

The lover, who's ogling, and rhyming, and sighing, Who's musing, and
pining, and whining, and dying: When a thousand of lies ev'ry minute he
tells--What is he, my friends, but a fool without bells?

V.

There's the lady so fine, with her airs and her graces, With a face
like an angel's--if angels have faces: She marries, and Hymen the vision
dispels--What's her husband, my friends, but a fool without bells?

_Christina, Eleonora, Helmaar, &c_.--Bravo! bravissimo!--excellent
fool!--Encore.

{_The fool folds his arms, and begins to cry bitterly_.}

_Christina_. What now, Aleftson? I never saw you sad before--What's the
matter?--Speak.

{_Fool sobs, but gives no answer_.}

_Helm_. Why do you weep so bitterly?

_Aleft_. Because I am a fool.

_Helm_. Many should weep, if that were cause sufficient.

_Eleon_. But, Aleftson, you have all your life, till now, been a merry
fool.

_Fool_. Because always, till now, I was a fool, but now I am grown wise:
and 'tis difficult, to all but you, lady, to be merry and wise.

_Christina_. A pretty compliment; 'tis a pity it was paid by a fool.

_Fool_. Who else should pay compliments, lady, or who else believe them?

_Christina_. Nay, I thought it was the privilege of a fool to speak the
truth without offence.

_Fool_. Fool as you take me to be, I'm not fool enough yet to speak
truth to a lady, and think to do it without offence.

_Eleon_. Why, you have said a hundred severe things to _me_ within this
week, and have I ever been angry with you?

_Fool_. Never; for, out of the whole hundred, not one was true. But have
a care, lady--fool as I am, you'd be glad to stop a fool's mouth with
your white hand this instant, rather than let him tell the truth of you.

_Christina_ (_laughing, and all the other ladies, except Eleonora,
exclaim_)--Speak on, good fool; speak on--

_Helm_. I am much mistaken, or the lady Eleonora fears not to hear the
truth from either wise men or fools--Speak on.

_Fool_. One day, not long ago, when there came news that our count there
was killed in Finland--I, being a fool, was lying laughing, and thinking
of nothing at all, on the floor, in the west drawing-room, looking at
the count's picture--In comes the Lady Eleonora, all in tears.

_Eleon_. (stopping his mouth.) Oh! tell any thing but _that_, good fool.

_Helmaar_ (_kneels and kisses her hand_). Speak on, excellent fool.

_Christina and ladies_. Speak on, excellent fool--In came the Lady
Eleonora, all in tears.

_Fool_. In comes the Lady Eleonora, all in tears--(_pauses and
looks round_). Why now, what makes you all so curious about these
tears?--Tears are but salt water, let them come from what eyes they
will--my tears are as good as hers--in came John Aleftson, all in tears,
just now, and nobody kneels to me--nobody kisses my hands--nobody cares
half a straw for my tears--(_folds his arms and looks melancholy_). I am
not one of those--I know the cause of my tears too well.

_Helm_. Perhaps they were caused by my unexpected return--hey?

_Fool_ (_scornfully_). No--I am not such a fool as that comes to. Don't
I know that, when you are at home, the poor may hold up their heads,
and no journeyman-gentleman of an agent dares then to go about plaguing
those who live in cottages? No, no,--I am not such a fool as to cry
because Count Helmaar is come back; but the truth is, I cried because I
am tired and ashamed of wearing this thing--(_throwing down his fool's
cap upon the floor, changes his tone entirely_)--_I!_--who am brother
to the man who saved Count Helmaar's life--I to wear a fool's cap and
bells--Oh shame! shame!

{_The ladies look at one another with signs of astonishment._}

_Christina_ (_aside_). A lucid interval--poor fool!--I will torment him
no more--he has feeling--'twere better he had none.

_Eleon_. Hush!--hear him!

_Aleft_. (_throwing himself at the counts feet_). Noble count, I have
submitted to be thought a fool; I have worn this fool's cap in your
absence, that I might indulge my humour, and enjoy the liberty of
speaking my mind freely to the people of all conditions. Now that you
are returned, I have no need of such a disguise--I may now speak the
truth without fear, and without a cap and bells.--I resign my salary,
and give back the ensign of my office--(_presents the fool's cap_).

{_Exit_.}

_Christina_. He might well say, that none but fools should pay
compliments--this is the best compliment that has been paid you,
brother.

_Eleon_. And observe, he has resigned his salary.

_Helm_. From this moment let it be doubled:--he made an excellent use of
money when he was a fool--may he make half as good a use of it now he is
a wise man.

_Christina_. Amen--and now I hope we are to have some more dancing.

{_Exeunt_.}

ACT II.

SCENE--_By moonlight--a forest--a castle illuminated at a distance.--A
group of peasants seated on the ground, each with a knapsack beside
him.--One peasant lies stretched on the ground_.

_1st Peasant_. Why, what I say is, that the wheel of the cart
being broken, and the horse dead lame, and Charles there in that
plight--(_points to the sleeping peasant_)--it is a folly to think of
getting on further this evening.

_2nd Peasant_. And what I say is, it's folly to sleep here, seeing I
know the country, and am certain sure we have not above one mile at
furthest to go, before we get to the end of our journey.

_1st Peasant_ (_pointing to the sleeper_). He can't walk a mile--he's
done for--dog tired--

_3rd Peasant_. Are you _certain_ sure we have only one mile further to
go?

_2nd Peasant_. Certain sure--

_All, except the sleeper and the 1st Peasant_. Oh, let us go on, then,
and we can carry the knapsacks on our backs for this one mile.

_1st Peasant_. You must carry him, then, knapsack and all.

_All together_. So we will.

_2nd Peasant_. But first, do you see, let's waken him; for a sleeping
man's twice as heavy as one that's awake--Hollo, friend! waken!
waken!--(_he shakes the sleeper, who snores loudly_)--Good Lord, he
snores loud enough to waken all the birds in the wood.

{_All the peasants shout in the sleeper's ear, and he starts up, shaking
himself._}

_Charles_. Am I awake?--(_stretching_.)

_2nd Peasant_. No, not yet, man--Why, don't you know where you are? Ay;
here's the moon--and these be trees; and--I be a man, and what do you
call this? (_holding up a knapsack_.)

_Charles_. A knapsack, I say, to be sure:--I'm as broad awake as the
best of you.

_2nd Peasant_. Come on, then; we've a great way further to go before you
sleep again.

_Charles_. A great way further! further to-night!--No, no.

_2nd Peasant_. Yes, yes; we settled it all while you were fast
asleep--You are to be carried, you and your knapsack.

{_They prepare to carry him_.}

_Charles_ (_starting up, and struggling with them_). I've legs to
walk--I won't be carried!--I, a Swede, and be carried!--No! No!--

_All together_. Yes! Yes!

_Charles_. No! No!--(_he struggles for his knapsack, which comes untied
in the struggle, and all the things fall out_.)--There, this comes of
playing the fool.

{_They help him to pick up the things, and exclaim,_}

_All_. There's no harm done--(_throwing the knapsack over his
shoulder_).

_Charles_. I'm the first to march, after all.

_Peasants_. Ay, in your sleep!

{_Exeunt, laughing._}

_Enter_ CATHERINE'S _two little Children_.

_Little Girl_. I am sure I heard some voices this way--suppose it was
the fairies!

_Little Boy_. It was only the rustling of the leaves. There are no such
things as fairies; but if there were any such, we have no need to fear
them.

_Little Boy sings_.

     I.

     Nor elves, nor fays, nor magic charm,
     Have pow'r, or will, to work us harm;
     For those who dare the truth to tell,
     Fays, elves, and fairies, wish them well.

     II.

     For us they spread their dainty fare,
     For us they scent the midnight air;
     For us their glow-worm lamps they light,
     For us their music cheers the night.

_Little Girl sings_.

I.

     Ye fays and fairies, hasten here,
     Robed in glittering gossamere;
     With tapers bright, and music sweet,
     And frolic dance, and twinkling feet.

     II.

     And, little Mable, let us view
     Your acorn goblets fill'd with dew;
     Nor warn us hence till we have seen
     The nut-shell chariot of your queen:

     III.

     In which on nights of yore she sat,
     Driven by her gray-coated gnat;
     With spider spokes and cobweb traces,
     And horses fit for fairy races.

     IV.

     And bid us join your revel ring,
     And see you dance, and hear you sing:
     Your fairy dainties let us taste,
     And speed us home with fairy haste.

 _Little Boy_. If there were really fairies, and if they would give me my wish, I know what I should ask.

_Little Girl._ And so do I--I would ask them to send father home before
I could count ten.

_Little Boy_. And I would ask to hear his general say to him, in the
face of the whole army, "This is a brave man!" And father should hold up
his head as I do now, and march thus by the side of his general.

{_As the little Boy marches, he stumbles_.}

_Little Girl_. Oh! take care!--come, let us march home:--but stay, I
have not found my faggot.

_Little Boy_. Never mind your faggot; it was not here you left it.

_Little Girl_. Yes, it was somewhere here, I'm sure, and I must find it,
to carry it home to mother, to make a blaze for her before she goes to
bed.

_Little Boy_. But she will wonder what keeps us up so late.

_Little Girl_. But we shall tell her what kept us. Look under those
trees, will you, whilst I look here, for my faggot.--When we get home,
I shall say, "Mother, do you know there is great news?--there's a great
many, many candles in the windows of the great house, and dancing
and music in the great house, because the master's come home, and the
housekeeper had not time to pay us, and we waited and waited with our
faggots; at last the butler--"

_Little Boy_. Heyday!--What have we here?--a purse, a purse, a heavy
purse.

_Little Girl_. Whose can it be? let us carry it home to mother.

_Little Boy_. No, no; it can't be mother's: mother has no purse full of
money. It must belong to somebody at the great house.

_Little Girl_. Ay, very likely to dame Ulrica, the housekeeper, for she
has more purses and money than any body else in the world.

_Little Boy_. Come, let us run back with it to her,--mother would tell
us to do so, I'm sure, if she was here.

_Little Girl_. But I'm afraid the housekeeper won't see us to-night.

_Little Boy_. Oh, yes; but I'll beg, and pray, and push, till I get into
her room.

_Little Girl_. Yes; but don't push me, or I shall knock my head against
the trees. Give me your hand, brother.--Oh, my faggot! I shall never
find you.

{_Exeunt_.}

SCENE--Catherine's _Cottage_.

CATHERINE, _spinning, sings_.

     I.

     Turn swift, my wheel, my busy wheel,
     And leave my heart no time to feel;
     Companion of my widow'd hour,
     My only friend, my only dow'r.

     II.

     Thy lengthening thread I love to see,
     Thy whirring sound is dear to me:
     Oh, swiftly turn by night and day,
     And toil for him that's far away.

_Catherine_. Hark! here come the children. No, 'twas only the wind.
What can keep these children so late?--but it is a fine moonlight
night--they'll have brave appetites for their supper when they come
back--but I wonder they don't come home.--Heigho! since their father
has been gone, I am grown a coward--(_a knock at the door heard_)--Come
in!--Why does every knock at the door startle me in this way?

_Enter_ CHARLES, _with a knapsack on his back_

_Charles_. Mistress! mayhap you did not expect to see a stranger at
this time o' night, as I guess by the looks of ye--but I'm only a poor
fellow, that has been a-foot a great many hours.

_Cath_. Then, pray ye, rest yourself, and such fare as we have you're
welcome to.

{_She sets milk, &c., on a table. Charles throws himself into a chair,
and flings his knapsack behind him_.}

_Charles_. 'Tis a choice thing to rest one's self:--I say, mistress,
you must know, I, and some more of us peasants, have come a many, many
leagues since break of day.

_Cath_. Indeed, you may well be tired--and where do you come from?--Did
you meet, on your road, any soldiers coming back from Finland?

_Charles (eats and speaks_). Not the soldiers themselves, I can't say as
I did; but we are them that are bringing home the knapsacks of the poor
fellows that have lost their lives in the wars in Finland.

_Cath._ (during this speech of Charles, leans on the back of a chair.
_Aside_) Now I shall know my fate.

_Charles (eating and speaking)_. My comrades are gone on to the village
beyond with their knapsacks, to get them owned by the families of them
to whom they belonged, as it stands to reason and right. Pray, mistress,
as you know the folks here-abouts, could you tell me whose knapsack this
is, here, behind me? (_looking up at Catherine_.)--Oons, but how pale
she looks! (_aside_). Here, sit ye down, do. (_Aside_) Why, I would not
have said a word if I had thought on it--to be sure she has a lover now,
that has been killed in the wars. (_Aloud_) Take a sup of the cold milk,
mistress.

_Catherine (goes fearfully towards the knapsack_). 'Tis his! 'tis my
husband's!

{_She sinks down on a chair, and hides her face with her hands_.}

_Charles_. Poor soul! poor soul!--(_he pauses_.) But now it is not clear
to me that you may not be mistaken, mistress:--these knapsacks be all
so much alike, I'm sure I could not, for the soul of me, tell one from
t'other--it is by what's in the inside only one can tell for certain.
(_Charles opens the knapsack, pulls out a waistcoat, carries it towards
Catherine, and holds it before her face_.)--Look ye here, now; don't
give way to sorrow while there's hope left--Mayhap, mistress--look at
this now, can't ye, mistress?

{_Catherine timidly moves her hands from before her face, sees the
waistcoat, gives a faint scream, and falls back in a swoon. The peasant
runs to support her.--At this instant the back door of the cottage
opens, and_ ALEFTSON _enters_.}

_Aleft_. Catherine!

_Charles_. Poor soul!--there, raise her head--give her air--she fell
into this swoon at the sight of yonder knapsack--her husband's--he's
dead. Poor creature!--'twas my luck to bring the bad news--what shall we
do for her?--I'm no better than a fool, when I see a body this way.

_Aleft_. (_sprinkling water on her face_.) She'll be as well as ever she
was, you'll see, presently--leave her to me!

_Charles_. There! she gave a sigh--she's coming to her senses.

{_Catherine raises herself_.}

_Cath_. What has been the matter?--(_She starts at the sight of
Aleftson_.)--My husband!--no--'tis Aleftson--what makes you look so like
him?--you don't look like yourself.

_Aleft. (aside to the peasant_.) Take that waistcoat out of the way.

_Cath_. (_looking round, sees the knapsack_.) What's there?--Oh, I
recollect it all now.--(_To Aleftson_) Look there! look there! your
brother! your brother's dead! Poor fool, you have no feeling.

_Aleft_. I wish I had none.

_Cath_. Oh, my husband!--shall I never, never see you more--never more
hear your voice--never more see my children in their father's arms?

_Aleft_. (_takes up the waistcoat, on which her eyes are fixed_.) But we
are not sure this is Christiern's.

_Charles (snatching it from him_). Don't show it to her again,
man!--you'll drive her mad.

_Aleft. (aside_.) Let me alone; I know what I'm about. (_Aloud_) 'Tis
certainly like a waistcoat I once saw him wear; but perhaps--

_Cath_. It is his--it is his--too well I know it--my own work--I gave it
to him the very day he went away to the wars--he told me he would wear
it again the day of his coming home--but he'll never come home again.

_Aleft_. How can you be _sure_ of that?

_Cath_. How!--why, am not I sure, too sure?--hey!--what do you mean?--he
smiles!--have you heard any thing?--do you know any thing?--but he can
know nothing--he can tell me nothing--he has no sense. (_She turns to
the peasant_.) Where did you get this knapsack?--did you see--

_Aleft_. He saw nothing--he knows nothing--he can tell you
nothing:--listen to me, Catherine--see, I have thrown aside the dress of
a fool--you know I had my senses once--I have them now as clear as ever
I had in my life--ay, you may well be surprised--but I will surprise you
more--Count Helmaar's come home.

_Cath_. Count Helmaar!--impossible!

_Charles_. Count Helmaar!--he was killed in the last battle, in Finland.

_Aleft_. I tell ye, he was not killed in any battle--he is safe at
home--I have just seen him.

_Cath_. Seen him!--but why do I listen to him, poor fool! he knows not
what he says--and yet, if the count be really alive--

_Charles_. Is the count really alive? I'd give my best cow to see him.

_Aleft_. Come with me, then, and in one quarter of an hour you _shall_
see him.

_Cath. (clasping her hands_.) Then there _is_ hope for me--Tell me, is
there any news?

_Aleft_. There is.

_Cath_. Of my husband?

_Aleft_. Yes--ask me no more--you must hear the rest from Count Helmaar
himself--he has sent for you.

_Cath. (springs forward_.) This instant let me go, let me hear--(_she
stops short at the sight of the waistcoat, which lies in her
passage_).--But what shall I hear?--there can be no good news for
me--this speaks too plainly.

{_Aleftson pulls her arm between his, and leads her away_.}

_Charles_. Nay, master, take me, as you promised, along with you--I
won't be left behind--I'm wide awake now--I must have a sight of Count
Helmaar in his own castle--why, they'll make much of me in every cottage
on my road home, when I can swear to 'em I've seen Count Helmaar alive,
in his own castle, face to face--God bless him, he's _the poor man's
friend_.

{_Exeunt_.}

SCENE--_The housekeeper's room in Count_ HELMAAR'S _Castle_.

ULRICA _and_ CHRISTIERN.

CHRISTIERN _is drawing on his boots_.--_Mrs_. ULRICA _is sitting at a
tea-table making coffee_.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Well, well; I'll say no more: if you can't stay to-night,
you can't--but I had laid it all out in my head so cleverly, that you
should stay, and take a good night's rest here, in the castle; then, in
the morning, you'll find yourself as fresh as a lark.

_Christiern_. Oh! I am not at all tired.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Not tired! don't tell me that, now, for I know that you
_are_ tired, and can't help being tired, say what you will--Drink this
dish of coffee, at any rate--(_he drinks coffee_).

_Christiern_. But the thoughts of seeing my Catherine and my little
ones--

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Very true, very true; but in one word, I want to see the
happy meeting, for such things are a treat to me, and don't come every
day, you know; and now, in the morning, I could go along with you to the
cottage, but you must be sensible I could not be spared out this night,
on no account or possibility.

_Enter Footman_.

_Footman_. Ma'am, the cook is hunting high and low for the
brandy-cherries.

_Mrs. Ulrica._ Lord bless me! are not they there before those eyes of
yours?--But I can't blame nobody for being out of their wits a little
with joy such a night as this.

{_Exit Footman_.}

_Christiern_. Never man was better beloved in the regiment than Count
Helmaar.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Ay! ay! so he is every where, and so he deserves to be.
Is your coffee good? sweeten to your taste, and don't spare sugar, nor
don't spare any thing that this house affords; for, to be sure, you
deserve it all--nothing can be too good for him that saved my master's
life. So now that we are comfortable and quiet over our dish of coffee,
pray be so very good as to tell me the whole story of my master's
escape, and of the horse being killed under him, and of your carrying
him off on your shoulders; for I've only heard it by bits and scraps, as
one may say; I've seen only the bill of fare, ha! ha! ha!--so now pray
set out all the good things for me, in due order, garnished and all;
and, before you begin, taste these cakes--they are my own making.

_Christiern (aside)_. 'Tis the one-and-twentieth time I've told the
story to-day; but no matter. (_Aloud_) Why, then, madam, the long and
the short of the story is--

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Oh, pray, let it be the _long_, not the _short_ of the
story, if you please: a story can never be too long for my taste, when
it concerns my master--'tis, as one may say, fine spun sugar, the longer
the finer, and the more I relish it--but I interrupt you, and you eat
none of my cake--pray go on--(_A call behind the scenes of Mrs. Ulrica!
Mrs. Ulrica!_)--Coming!--coming!--patience.

_Christiern_. Why, then, madam, we were, as it might be, here--just
please to look; I've drawn the field of battle for you here, with
coffee, on the table--and you shall be the enemy.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. I!--no--I'll not be the enemy--my master's enemy!

_Christiern_. Well, I'll be the enemy.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. You!--Oh no, you sha'n't be the enemy.

_Christiern_. Well, then, let the cake be the enemy.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. The cake--my cake!--no, indeed.

_Christiern_. Well, let the candle be the enemy.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Well, let the candle be the enemy; and where was my
master, and where are you--I don't understand--what is all this great
slop?

_Christiern_. Why, ma'am, the field of battle; and let the coffee-pot be
my master: here comes the enemy--

_Enter Footman_.

_Footman_. Mrs. Ulrica, more refreshments wanting for the dancers above.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. More refreshments!--more!--bless my heart, 'tis an
_un_possibility they can have swallowed down all I laid out, not an hour
ago, in the confectionary room.

_Footman_. Confectionary room! Oh, I never thought of looking there.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Look ye there, now!--why, where did you think of looking,
then?--in the stable, or the cockloft, hey?--{_Exit Footman_.}--But I
can't scold on such a night as this: their poor heads are all turned
with joy; and my own's scarce in a more proper_er_ condition--Well,
I beg your pardon--pray go on--the coffee-pot is my master, and the
candle's the enemy.

_Christiern_. So, ma'am, here comes the enemy full drive, upon Count
Helmaar.

{_A call without of Mrs. Ulrica! Mrs. Ulrica! Mrs. Ulrica!_}

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Mrs. Ulrica! Mrs. Ulrica!--can't you do without Mrs.
Ulrica one instant but you must call, call--(_Mrs. Ulrica! Mrs.
Ulrica!_)--Mercy on us, what do you want? I _must_ go for one instant.

_Christiern_. And I _must_ bid ye a good night.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Nay, nay, nay,--(_eagerly_)--you won't go--I'll be back.

_Enter Footman_.

_Footman_ Ma'am! Mrs. Ulrica! the key of the blue press.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. The key of the blue press--I had it in my hand just
now--I gave it--I--(_looks amongst a bunch of keys, and then all round
the room_)--I know nothing at all about it, I tell you--I must drink my
tea, and I will--{_Exit Footman_}. 'Tis a sin to scold on such a night
as this, if one could help it--Well, Mr. Christiern, so the coffee-pot's
my master.

_Christiern_. And the sugar-basin--why here's a key in the sugar-basin.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Lord bless me! 'tis the very key, the key of the blue
press--why dear me--(_feels in her pocket_)--and here are the sugar
tongs in my pocket, I protest--where was my poor head? Hers, Thomas!
Thomas! here's the key; take it, and don't say a word for your life, if
you can help it; you need not come in, I say--(_she holds the door--the
footman pushes in_).

_Footman_. But, ma'am, I have something particular to say.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Why, you've always something particular to say--is it any
thing about my master?

_Footman_. No, but about your purse, ma'am.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. What of my purse?

_Footman_. Here's your little godson, ma'am, is here, who has found it.

_Mrs. Ulrica_ (_aside_). Hold your foolish tongue, can't you?--don't
mention my little godson, for your life.

{_The little boy creeps in under the footman's arm; his sister Kate
follows him. Mrs. Ulrica lifts up her hands and eyes, with signs of
impatience_.}

_Mrs. Ulrica_ (_aside_). Now I had settled in my head that their father
should not see them till to-morrow morning.

_Little Girl_. Who is that strange man?

_Little Boy_. He has made me forget all I had to say.

_Christiern_ (_aside_). What charming children!

_Mrs. Ulrica_ (_asid_). He does not know them to be his--they don't know
him to be their father. (_Aloud_) Well, children, what brings you here
at this time of night?

_Little Boy_. What I was going to say was--(_the little boy looks at
the stranger between every two or three words, and Christiern looks at
him_)--what I was going to say was--

_Little Girl_. Ha! ha! ha!--he forgets that we found this purse in the
forest as we were going home.

_Little Boy_. And we thought that it might be yours.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Why should you think it was mine?

_Little Boy_. Because nobody else could have so much money in one purse;
so we brought it to you--here it is.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. 'Tis none of my purse. (_Aside_) Oh! he'll certainly find
out that they are his children--(_she stands between the children and
Christiern_). 'Tis none of my purse; but you are good, honest little
dears, and I'll be hanged if I won't carry you both up to my master
himself, this very minute, and tell the story of your honesty before all
the company.

{_She pushes the children towards the door. Ulric looks back._}

_Little Boy_. He has a soldier's coat on--let me ask him if he is a
soldier.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. No--what's that to you?

_Little Girl_. Let me ask him if he knows any thing about father.

_Mrs. Ulrica_ (_puts her hand before the little girl's mouth_). Hold
your little foolish tongue, I say--what's that to you?

{_Exeunt, Mrs. Ulrica pushing forward the children._}

_Enter, at the opposite door,_ THOMAS, _the footman._

_Footman._ Sir, would you please to come into our servants'-hall, only
for one instant: there's one wants to speak a word to you.

_Christiern._ Oh, I cannot stay another moment: I must go home: who is
it?

_Footman_. 'Tis a poor man who has brought in two carts full of my
master's baggage; and my master begs you'll be so very good as to see
that the things are all right, as you know 'em, and no one else here
does.

_Christiern (with impatience)._ How provoking!--a full hour's work:--I
sha'n't get home this night, I see that:--I wish the man and the baggage
were in the Gulf of Finland. {_Exeunt._}

SCENE--_The apartment where the_ COUNT, ELEONORA, CHRISTINA, _&c., were
dancing._

_Enter Mrs._ ULRICA, _eading the two children._

_Christina._ Ha! Mrs. Ulrica, and her little godson.

_Mrs. Ulrica._ My lady, I beg pardon for presuming to interrupt; but
I was so proud of my little godson and his sister, though not my
goddaughter, that I couldn't but bring them up, through the very midst
of the company, to my master, to praise them according to their deserts;
for nobody can praise those that deserve it so well as my master--to my
fancy.

_Eleonora_ (_aside_). Nor to mine.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Here's a purse, sir, which this little boy and girl
of mine found in the woods as they were going home; and, like honest
children, as they are, they came back with it directly to me, thinking
that it was mine.

_Helmaar_. Shake hands, my honest little fellow--this is just what I
should have expected from a godson of Mrs. Ulrica, and a son of--

_Mrs. Ulrica (aside to the Count_). Oh, Lord bless you, sir, don't
tell him--My lady--(_to Christina_)--would you take the children out of
hearing?

_Eleon_. (_to the children_). Come with us, my dears.

{_Exeunt ladies and children._}

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Don't, sir, pray, tell the children any thing about their
father: they don't know that their father's here, though they've just
seen him; and I've been striving all I can to keep the secret, and to
keep the father here all night, that I may have the pleasure of seeing
the meeting of father and mother and children at their own cottage
to-morrow. I would not miss the sight of their meeting for fifty pounds;
and yet I shall not see it after all--for Christiern will go, all I can
say or do. Lord bless me! I forgot to bolt him in when I came up with
the children--the bird's flown, for certain--(_going in a great hurry_).

_Helmaar_. Good Mrs. Ulrica, you need not be alarmed; your prisoner is
very safe, I can assure you, though you forgot to bolt him in: I have
given him an employment that will detain him a full hour, for I design
to have the pleasure of restoring my deliverer myself to his family.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Oh! that will be delightful!--Then you'll keep him here
all night!--but that will vex him terribly; and of all the days and
nights of the year, one wouldn't have any body vexed this day or night,
more especially the man, who, as I may say, is the cause of all our
illuminations, and rejoicings, and dancings--no, no, happen what will,
we must not have him vexed.

_Helmaar_. He shall not be vexed, I promise you; and, if it be necessary
to keep your heart from breaking, my good Mrs. Ulrica, I'll tell you a
secret, which I had intended, I own, to have kept from you one half hour
longer.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. A secret! dear sir, half an hour's a great while, to
keep a secret from one when it's about one's friends: pray, if it be
proper--but you are the best judge--I should be very glad to hear just a
little hint of the matter, to prepare me.

_Helmaar_. Then prepare in a few minutes to see the happy meeting
between Christiern and his family: I have sent to his cottage for his
wife, to desire that she would come hither immediately.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Oh! a thousand thanks to you, sir; but I'm afraid the
messenger will let the cat out of the bag.

_Helmaar_. The man I have sent can keep a secret--Which way did the Lady
Eleonora go?--Are those peasants in the hall? {_Exit Count._}

_Mrs. Ulrica_ (_following_). She went towards the west drawing-room, I
think, sir.--Yes, sir, the peasants are at supper in the hall. (_Aside_)
Bless me! I wonder what messenger he sent, for I don't know many--men I
mean--fit to be trusted with a secret. {_Exit_.}

SCENE--_An apartment in Count_ HELMAAR'S
_Castle_.--ELEONORA.--CHRISTINA.--_Little_ KATE _and_ ULRIC _asleep on
the floor_.

_Eleon_. Poor creatures! they were quite tired by sitting up so late: is
their mother come yet?

_Christina._ Not yet; but she will soon be here, for my brother told
Aleftson to make all possible haste. Do you know where my brother
is?--he is not among the dancers. I expected to have found him sighing
at the Lady Eleonora's feet.

_Eleon_. He is much better employed than in sighing at any body's
feet; he is gone down into the great hall, to see and reward some
poor peasants who have brought home the knapsacks of those unfortunate
soldiers who fell in the last battle:--your good Mrs. Ulrica found out
that these peasants were in the village near us--she sent for them, got
a plentiful supper ready, and the count is now speaking to them.

_Christina_. And can you forgive my ungallant brother for thinking of
vulgar boors, when he ought to be intent on nothing but your bright
eyes?--then all I can say is, you are both of you just fit for one
another: every _fool_, indeed, saw that long ago.

{_A cry behind the scenes of "Long line Count Helmaar! Long live the
good count! long live the poor man's friend!_"}

_Christina (joins the cry_). Long live Count Helmaar!--join me,
Eleonora--long live the good count! long live the poor man's friend!

{_The little children waken, start up, and stretch themselves_.}

_Eleon_. There, you have wakened these poor children.

_Ulric_. What's the matter? I dreamed father was shaking hands with me.

_Enter Mrs_. ULRICA.

_Little Kate_. Mrs. Ulrica! where am I? I thought I was in my little bed
at home--I was dreaming about a purse, I believe.

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Was it about this purse you were dreaming?--(_shows the
purse which the children found in the wood_)--Come, take it into your
little hands, and waken and rouse yourselves, for you must come and
give this purse back to the rightful owner; I've found him out for
you--(_Aside to Christina and Eleonora_). And now, ladies, if you please
to go up into the gallery, you'll see something worth looking at.

{_Exeunt_.}

SCENE--_A hall in Count_ HELMAAR'S _Castle.--Peasants rising from supper
in the back scene_.

_1st Peasant_. Here's a health to the poor man's friend; and may
every poor man, every poor honest man--and there are none other in
Sweden--find as good a friend as Count Helmaar.

_Enter_ CHARLES, _eagerly_.

_Charles_. Count Helmaar! is he here?

_Omnes_. Heyday! Charles, the sleeper, broad awake! or is he walking in
his sleep?

_Charles_. Where's Count Helmaar, I say?--I'd walk in my sleep, or any
way, to get a sight of him.

_1st Peasant_. Hush! stand back!--here's some of the quality coming, who
are not thinking of you.

{_The peasants all retire to the back scene. Count_ HELMAAR, CHRISTINA,
_and_ ELEONORA, _appear, looking from a gallery. Enter_ ALEFTSON _and_
CATHERINE _at one door, Mrs._ ULRICA _at the opposite door, with_
CHRISTIERN, _followed by the two children._}

_Cath._ (_springs forward_.) Christiern! my husband! alive!--is it a
dream?

_Christiern_ (_embracing her_). Your own Christiern, dearest Catherine.

{_The children clap their hands, and run to their father._}

_Ulric._ Why, I thought he was my father; only he did not shake hands
with me.

_Kate._ And Mrs. Ulrica hid me hold my tongue.

_Christiern._ My Ulric! my little Kate!

_Mrs. Ulrica._ Ay, my little Kate, you may speak now as much as you
will.--(_Their father kisses them eagerly._)--Ay, kiss them, kiss them;
they are as good children as ever were born--and as honest: Kate, show
him the purse, and ask him if it be his.

_Kate._ Is it yours, father?--(_holds up the purse_).

_Christiern._ 'Tis mine; 'twas in my knapsack; but how it came here,
Heaven knows.

_Ulric._ We found it in the wood, father, as we were going home, just at
the foot of a tree.

_Charles_ (_comes forward_). Why, mayhap, now I recollect, I might
have dropped it there--more shame for me, or rather more shame for
them--(_looking back at his companions_)--that were playing the fool
with me, and tumbled out all the things on the ground. Master, I hope
there's no harm done: we poor peasant fellows have brought home all the
other knapsacks safe and sound to the relations of them that died; and
yours came by mistake, it seems.

_Christiern._ It's a very lucky mistake; for I wouldn't have lost a
waistcoat which there is in that knapsack for all the waistcoats in
Sweden. My Catherine, 'twas that which you gave me the day before I went
abroad--do you remember it?

_Charles._ Ay, that she does; it had like to have been the death of
her--for she thought you must be dead for certain when he saw it brought
home without you--but I knew he was not ead, mistress--did not I tell
you, mistress, not to give way to sorrow while there was hope left?

_Cath_. O joy! joy!--too much joy!

_Aleft_. Now are you sorry you came with me when I bade you?--but I'm a
fool!--I'm a fool!

_Ulric_. But where's the cap and coat you used to wear?

_Kate_. You are quite another man, uncle.

_Aleft_. The same man, niece, only in another coat.

_Mrs. Ulrica (laughing)_. How they stare!----Well, Christiern, you are
not angry with my master and me for keeping you now?--but angry or not,
I don't care, for I wouldn't have missed seeing this meeting for any
thing in the whole world.

_Enter Count_ HELMAAR, ELEONOKA, _and_ CHRISTINA.

_Christina_. Nor I.

_Eleon_. Nor I.

_Helmaar_. Nor I.

_The Peasants_. Nor any of us

_Helmaar (to little Ulric)_. My honest little boy, is that the purse
which you found in the wood?

_Ulric_. Yes, and it's my own father's.

_Helmaar_. And how much money is there in it?

{_The child opens the purse, and spreads the money on the floor_.}

_Ulric (to Mrs. Ulrica)_. Count you, for I can't count so much.

_Mrs. Ulrica (counts)_. Eight ducats, five rixdollars, and let me see
how many--sixteen carolines{2}:--'twould have been pity, Catherine, to
have lost all this treasure, which Christiern has saved for you.

{Footnote 2: A rixdollar is 4s. 6d. sterling; two rixdollars are equal
in value to a ducat; a caroline is 1s. 2d.}

_Helmaar_. Catherine, I beg that all the money in this purse may be
given to these honest peasants. (_To Kate_) Here, take it to them, my
little modest girl. As for you and your children, Catherine, you may
depend upon it that I will not neglect to make you easy in the world:
your own good conduct, and the excellent manner in which you have
brought up these children, would incline me to serve you, even if your
husband had not saved my life.

_Cath_. Christiern, my dear husband, and did _you_ save Count Helmaar's
life?

_Mrs. Ulrica_. Ay, that he did.

_Cath_. (_embracing him_.) I am the happiest wife, and--(_turning to
kiss her children_)--the happiest mother upon earth.

_Charles_ (_staring up in Count Helmaar's face_). God bless him! I've
seen him face to face at last; and now I wish in my heart I could see
his wife.

_Christina_. And so do I most sincerely: my dear brother, who has been
all his life labouring for the happiness of others, should now surely
think of making himself happy.

_Eleonora_ (_giving her hand to Helmaar_). No, leave that to me, for I
shall think of nothing else all my life.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS, VOLUME 1 (OF 10) ***

***** This file should be named 8826-0.txt or 8826-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
    https://www.gutenberg.org/8/8/2/8826/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


</doc>
<doc id="file28565812" filename="pg28198.txt" parent_folder="Literature" url="https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/28198/pg28198.txt">
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A Budget of Christmas Tales by Charles
Dickens and Others, by Various


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: A Budget of Christmas Tales by Charles Dickens and Others


Author: Various



Release Date: February 26, 2009  [eBook #28198]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BUDGET OF CHRISTMAS TALES BY
CHARLES DICKENS AND OTHERS***


E-text prepared by David Edwards, Martin Pettit, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from digital
material generously made available by Internet Archive
(http://www.archive.org/)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/budgetofchristma00dick





A BUDGET OF CHRISTMAS TALES.

By Charles Dickens and Others.







Published by The Christian Herald
Louis Klopsch, Proprietor.
Bible House, New York.

Copyright 1895.
by Louis Klopsch.

Press and Bindery of Historical Publishing Co.,
Philadelphia.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.

                                     PAGE

A Christmas Carol                      13
CHARLES DICKENS.

The Christmas Babe                     73
MARGARET E. SANGSTER.

A Western Christmas                    74
MRS. W. H. CORNING.

Joe's Search for Santa Claus           83
IRVING BACHELLER.

Angela's Christmas                     87
JULIA SCHAYER.

The First Puritan Christmas Tree      100
(ANONYMOUS.)

First New England Christmas           103
HEZEKIAH BUTTERWORTH.

The Chimes                            106
CHARLES DICKENS.

Billy's Santa Claus Experience        170
CORNELIA REDMOND.

Christmas in Poganuc                  173
MRS. H. B. STOWE.

The Christmas Princess                192
MRS. MOLESWORTH.

Widow Townsend's Visitor              210
(ANONYMOUS.)

The Old Man's Christmas               223
ELLA WHEELER WILCOX.

The Christmas Goblin                  239
CHARLES DICKENS.

The Song of the Star                  244
C. H. MEAD.

Indian Pete's Christmas Gift          252
H. W. COLLINGWOOD.

My Christmas Dinner                   264
(ANONYMOUS.)

The Poor Traveler                     272
CHARLES DICKENS.

The Legend of the Christmas Tree      287
(ANONYMOUS.)

The Peace Egg                         290
JULIANA HORATIA EWING.




CHRISTMAS TALES.




A CHRISTMAS CAROL.

BY CHARLES DICKENS.


STAVE ONE.

MARLEY'S GHOST.


Marley was dead, to begin with. There is no doubt whatever about that.
The register of his burial was signed by the clergyman, the clerk, the
undertaker, and the chief mourner. Scrooge signed it. And Scrooge's name
was good upon 'Change, for anything he chose to put his hand to.

Old Marley was dead as a door-nail.

Scrooge knew he was dead? Of course he did. How could it be otherwise?
Scrooge and he were partners for I don't know how many years. Scrooge
was his sole executor, his sole administrator, his sole assign, his sole
residuary legatee, his sole friend, and sole mourner. And even Scrooge
was not so dreadfully cut up by the sad event, but that he was an
excellent man of business on the very day of the funeral, and solemnized
it with an undoubted bargain.

The mention of Marley's funeral brings me back to the point I started
from. There is no doubt that Marley was dead. This must be distinctly
understood, or nothing wonderful can come of the story I am going to
relate.

Scrooge never painted out Old Marley's name. There it stood, years
afterward, above the warehouse door: Scrooge and Marley. The firm was
known as Scrooge and Marley. Sometimes people new to the business called
Scrooge Scrooge, and sometimes Marley, but he answered to both names. It
was all the same to him.

Oh! But he was a tight-fisted hand at the grindstone, Scrooge! a
squeezing, wrenching, grasping, scraping, clutching, covetous, old
sinner! Hard and sharp as flint, from which no steel had ever struck out
generous fire; secret and self-contained, and solitary as an oyster. The
cold within him froze his old features, nipped his pointed nose,
shriveled his cheek, stiffened his gait; made his eyes red, his thin
lips blue; and spoke out shrewdly in his grating voice. A frosty rime on
his head, and on his eyebrows, and his wiry chin.

External heat and cold had little influence on Scrooge. No warmth could
warm, no wintry weather chill him. No wind that blew was bitterer than
he, no falling snow was more intent upon its purpose, no pelting rain
less open to entreaty. Foul weather didn't know where to have him. The
heaviest rain, and snow, and hail, and sleet, could boast of the
advantage over him in only one respect. They often "came down"
handsomely, and Scrooge never did.

Nobody ever stopped him in the street to say, with gladsome looks, "My
dear Scrooge, how are you? When will you come to see me?" No beggars
implored him to bestow a trifle, no children asked him what it was
o'clock, no man or woman ever once in all his life inquired the way to
such and such a place, of Scrooge.

But what did Scrooge care? It was the very thing he liked. To edge his
way along the crowded paths of life, warning all human sympathy to keep
its distance, was what the knowing ones call "nuts" to Scrooge.

Once upon a time--of all the good days in the year, on Christmas
Eve--old Scrooge sat busy in his counting-house. It was cold, bleak,
biting weather: foggy withal: and he could hear the people in the court
outside, go wheezing up and down, beating their hands upon their
breasts, and stamping their feet upon the pavement stones to warm them.
The city clocks had only just gone three, but it was quite dark
already--it had not been light all day--and candles were flaring in the
windows of the neighboring offices, like ruddy smears upon the palpable
brown air.

The door of Scrooge's counting-house was open, that he might keep his
eye upon his clerk, who in a dismal little cell beyond, a sort of tank,
was copying letters. Scrooge had a very small fire, but the clerk's fire
was so very much smaller that it looked like one coal. But he couldn't
replenish it, for Scrooge kept the coal-box in his own room; and so
surely as the clerk came in with the shovel, the master predicted that
it would be necessary for them to part. Wherefore the clerk put on his
white comforter, and tried to warm himself at the candle; in which
effort, not being a man of strong imagination, he failed.

"A merry Christmas, uncle! God save you!" cried a cheerful voice. It was
the voice of Scrooge's nephew, who came upon him so quickly that this
was the first intimation he had of his approach.

"Bah!" said Scrooge. "Humbug!"

He had so heated himself with rapid walking in the fog and frost, this
nephew of Scrooge's, that he was all in a glow; his face was ruddy and
handsome; his eyes sparkled, and his breath smoked again.

"Christmas a humbug, uncle!" said Scrooge's nephew. "You don't mean
that, I am sure?"

"I do," said Scrooge. "Merry Christmas! What right have you to be
merry? What reason have you to be merry? You're poor enough."

"Come then," returned the nephew gaily. "What right have you to be
dismal? What reason have you to be morose? You're rich enough."

Scrooge having no better answer ready on the spur of the moment, said,
"Bah!" again; and followed it up with, "Keep Christmas in your own way,
and let me keep it in mine."

"Keep it!" repeated Scrooge's nephew. "But you don't keep it."

"Let me leave it alone, then," said Scrooge. "Much good may it do you!
Much good it has ever done you!"

"There are many things from which I might have derived good, by which I
have not profited, I dare say," returned the nephew, "Christmas among
the rest. But I am sure I have always thought of Christmas time, when it
has come round--apart from the veneration due to its sacred name and
origin, if anything belonging to it can be apart from that--as a good
time; a kind, forgiving, charitable, pleasant time; the only time I know
of, in the long calendar of the year, when men and women seem by one
consent to open their shut-up hearts freely, and to think of people
below them as if they really were fellow-passengers to the grave, and
not another race of creatures bound on other journeys. And therefore,
uncle, though it has never put a scrap of gold or silver in my pocket, I
believe that it _has_ done me good, and _will_ do me good; and I say,
God bless it!"

The clerk in the tank involuntarily applauded. Becoming immediately
sensible of the impropriety, he poked the fire, and extinguished the
last frail spark for ever.

"Let me hear another sound from _you_," said Scrooge, "and you'll keep
your Christmas by losing your situation. You're quite a powerful
speaker, sir," he added, turning to his nephew. "I wonder you don't go
into Parliament."

"Don't be angry, uncle. Come! Dine with us to-morrow."

Scrooge said that he would see him--yes, indeed he did. He went the
whole length of the expression, and said that he would see him in that
extremity first.

"But why?" cried Scrooge's nephew, "Why?"

"Why did you get married?" said Scrooge.

"Because I fell in love."

"Because you fell in love!" growled Scrooge, as if that were the only
one thing in the world more ridiculous than a merry Christmas. "Good
afternoon!"

"Nay, uncle, but you never came to see me before that happened. Why give
it as a reason for not coming now?"

"Good afternoon," said Scrooge.

"I want nothing from you; I ask nothing of you; why cannot we be
friends?"

"Good afternoon," said Scrooge.

"I am sorry, with all my heart, to find you so resolute. We have never
had any quarrel, to which I have been a party. But I have made the trial
in homage to Christmas, and I'll keep my Christmas humor to the last. So
a Merry Christmas, uncle!"

"Good afternoon!" said Scrooge.

"And a Happy New Year!"

"Good afternoon!" said Scrooge.

His nephew left the room without an angry word, notwithstanding. He
stopped at the outer door to bestow the greetings of the season on the
clerk, who, cold as he was, was warmer than Scrooge; for he returned
them cordially.

"There's another fellow," muttered Scrooge; who overheard him: "my
clerk, with fifteen shillings a week, and a wife and family, talking
about a merry Christmas. I'll retire to Bedlam."

This lunatic, in letting Scrooge's nephew out, had let two other people
in. They were portly gentlemen, pleasant to behold, and now stood, with
their hats off, in Scrooge's office. They had books and papers in their
hands, and bowed to him.

"Scrooge and Marley's, I believe," said one of the gentlemen, referring
to his list. "Have I the pleasure of addressing Mr. Scrooge, or Mr.
Marley?"

"Mr. Marley has been dead these seven years," Scrooge replied. "He died
seven years ago, this very night."

"We have no doubt his liberality is well represented by his surviving
partner," said the gentleman, presenting his credentials.

It certainly was; for they had been two kindred spirits. At the ominous
word "liberality," Scrooge frowned, and shook his head, and handed the
credentials back.

"At this festive season of the year, Mr. Scrooge," said the gentleman,
taking up a pen, "it is more than usually desirable that we should make
some slight provision for the poor and destitute, who suffer greatly at
the present time. Many thousands are in want of common necessaries;
hundreds of thousands are in want of common comforts, sir."

"Are there no prisons?" asked Scrooge.

"Plenty of prisons," said the gentleman, laying down the pen again.

"And the Union workhouses?" demanded Scrooge. "Are they still in
operation?"

"They are. Still," returned the gentleman, "I wish I could say they were
not. Under the impression that they scarcely furnish Christian cheer of
mind or body to the multitude, a few of us are endeavoring to raise a
fund to buy the poor some meat and drink, and means of warmth. We choose
this time, because it is a time, of all others, when Want is keenly
felt, and Abundance rejoices. What shall I put you down for?"

"Nothing!" Scrooge replied.

"You wish to be anonymous?"

"I wish to be left alone," said Scrooge. "Since you ask me what I wish,
gentlemen, that is my answer. I don't make merry myself at Christmas,
and I can't afford to make idle people merry. I help to support the
establishments I have mentioned--they cost enough; and those who are
badly off must go there."

"Many can't go there; and many would rather die."

"If they would rather die," said Scrooge, "they had better do it, and
decrease the surplus population. Besides--excuse me--I don't know that."

"But you might know it," observed the gentleman.

"It's not my business," Scrooge returned. "It's enough for a man to
understand his own business, and not to interfere with other people's.
Mine occupies me constantly. Good afternoon, gentlemen!"

Seeing clearly that it would be useless to pursue their point, the
gentlemen withdrew. Scrooge resumed his labors with an improved opinion
of himself, and in a more facetious temper than was usual with him.

At length the hour of shutting up the counting-house arrived. With an
ill-will Scrooge dismounted from his stool, and tacitly admitted the
fact to the expectant clerk in the tank, who instantly snuffed his
candle out, and put on his hat.

"You'll want all day to-morrow, I suppose?" said Scrooge.

"If quite convenient, sir."

"It's not convenient," said Scrooge, "and it's not fair. If I was to
stop half-a-crown for it, you'd think yourself ill-used, I'll be bound?"

The clerk smiled faintly.

"And yet," said Scrooge, "you don't think _me_ ill-used, when I pay a
day's wages for no work."

The clerk observed that it was only once a year.

"A poor excuse for picking a man's pocket every twenty-fifth of
December!" said Scrooge, buttoning his great coat to the chin. "But I
suppose you must have the whole day. Be here all the earlier next
morning."

The clerk promised that he would; and Scrooge walked out with a growl.
The office was closed in a twinkling, and the clerk, with the long ends
of his white comforter dangling below his waist (for he boasted no great
coat), went down a slide on Cornhill, at the end of a lane of boys,
twenty times, in honor of its being Christmas-eve, and then ran home to
Camden Town as hard as he could pelt, to play at blindman's buff.

Scrooge took his melancholy dinner in his usual melancholy tavern; and
having read all the newspapers, and beguiled the rest of the evening
with his banker's-book, went home to bed. He lived in chambers which had
once belonged to his deceased partner. They were a gloomy suite of
rooms, in a lowering pile of building up a yard, where it had so little
business to be, that one could scarcely help fancying it must have run
there when it was a young house, playing at hide-and-seek with other
houses, and have forgotten the way out again. It was old enough now, and
dreary enough; for nobody lived in it but Scrooge, the other rooms being
all let out as offices.

Every room above, and every cask in the wine-merchant's cellars below,
appeared to have a separate peal of echoes of its own. Scrooge was not a
man to be frightened by echoes. He fastened the door, and walked across
the hall, and up the stairs; slowly too: trimming his candle as he went.
Half a dozen gas-lamps out of the street wouldn't have lighted the
entry too well, so you may suppose that it was pretty dark with
Scrooge's dip.

Up Scrooge went, not caring a button for that. Darkness is cheap, and
Scrooge liked it. But before he shut his heavy door, he walked through
his rooms to see that all was right.

Quite satisfied, he closed his door, and locked himself in;
double-locked himself in, which was not his custom. Thus secured against
surprise, he, took off his cravat; put on his dressing gown and
slippers, and his night-cap; and sat down before the fire to take his
gruel. As he threw his head back in the chair, his glance happened to
rest upon a bell, a disused bell, that hung in the room, and
communicated for some purpose now forgotten with a chamber in the
highest story of the building. It was with great astonishment, and with
a strange, inexplicable dread, that as he looked, he saw this bell begin
to swing. It swung so softly in the outset that it scarcely made a
sound; but soon it rang out loudly, and so did every bell in the house.

This might have lasted half a minute, or a minute, but it seemed an
hour. The bells ceased as they had begun, together. They were succeeded
by a clanking noise deep down below, as if some person were dragging a
heavy chain over the casks in the wine-merchant's cellar. Scrooge then
remembered to have heard that ghosts in haunted houses were described as
dragging chains.

The cellar-door flew open with a booming sound, and then he heard the
noise much louder, on the floors below; then coming up the stairs; then
coming straight toward his door.

"It's humbug still!" said Scrooge. "I won't believe it."

His color changed though, when, without a pause, it came on through the
heavy door, and passed into the room before his eyes. Upon its coming
in, the dying flame leaped up, as though it cried "I know him! Marley's
ghost!" and fell again.

The same face: the very same. The chain he drew was clasped about his
middle. It was long and wound about him like a tail; and it was made
(for Scrooge observed it closely) of cash-boxes, keys, padlocks,
ledgers, deeds, and heavy purses wrought in steel.

"How now" said Scrooge, caustic and cold as ever. "What do you want with
me?"

"Much!"--Marley's voice, no doubt about it.

"Who are you?"

"Ask me who I _was_."

"Who _were_ you then?" said Scrooge, raising his voice. "You're
particular, for a shade." He was going to say "_to_ a shade," but
substituted this, as more appropriate.

"In life I was your partner, Jacob Marley."

"Can you--can you sit down?" asked Scrooge, looking doubtfully at him.

"I can."

"Do it, then."

Scrooge asked the question, because he didn't know whether a ghost so
transparent might find himself in a condition to take a chair; and felt
that in the event of its being impossible, it might involve the
necessity of an embarrassing explanation. But the Ghost sat down on the
opposite side of the fireplace, as if he were quite used to it.

Scrooge fell upon his knees, and clasped his hands before his face.

"Mercy!" he said, "Dreadful apparition, why do you trouble me?"

"Man of the worldly mind!" replied the Ghost, "do you believe in me or
not?"

"I do," said Scrooge. "I must. But why do spirits walk the earth, and
why do they come to me?"

"It is required of every man," the Ghost returned, "that the spirit
within him should walk abroad among his fellow-men, and travel far and
wide; and if that spirit goes not forth in life, it is condemned to do
so after death. It is doomed to wander through the world--oh, woe is
me!--and witness what it cannot share, but might have shared on earth,
and turned to happiness!"

The spectre raised a cry, and shook its chain and wrung its shadowy
hands.

"You are fettered," said Scrooge, trembling. "Tell me why?"

"I wear the chain I forged in life," replied the Ghost. "I made it link
by link, and yard by yard; I girded it on of my own free will, and of my
own free will I wore it. Is its pattern strange to _you_?"

Scrooge trembled more and more.

"Or would you know," pursued the Ghost, "the weight and length of the
strong coil you bear yourself? It was full as heavy and as long as this,
seven Christmas Eves ago. You have labored on it since. It is a
ponderous chain!"

Scrooge glanced about him on the floor, in the expectation of finding
himself surrounded by some fifty or sixty fathoms of iron cable; but he
could see nothing.

"Jacob," he said imploringly. "Old Jacob Marley, tell me more. Speak
comfort to me, Jacob!"

"I have none to give," the Ghost replied. "It comes from other regions,
Ebenezer Scrooge, and is conveyed by other ministers, to other kinds of
men. Nor can I tell you what I would. A very little more, is all
permitted to me. I cannot rest, I cannot stay, I cannot linger anywhere.
My spirit never walked beyond our counting-house--mark me!--in life my
spirit never roved beyond the narrow limits of our money-changing hole;
and weary journeys lie before me!"

It was a habit with Scrooge, whenever he became thoughtful, to put his
hands in his breeches' pockets. Pondering on what the Ghost had said, he
did so now, but without lifting up his eyes, or getting off his knees.

"You must have been very slow about it, Jacob," Scrooge observed, in a
business-like manner, though with humility and deference.

"Slow!" the Ghost repeated.

"Seven years dead," mused Scrooge. "And traveling all the time?"

"The whole time," said the Ghost. "No rest, no peace. Incessant torture
of remorse."

"You travel fast?" said Scrooge.

"On the wings of the wind," replied the Ghost.

"You might have got over a great quantity of ground in seven years,"
said Scrooge.

The Ghost, on hearing this set up another cry, and clanked its chain
hideously.

"Oh! captive, bound, and double-ironed," cried the Phantom, "not to know
that ages of incessant labor, by immortal creatures, for this earth must
pass into eternity before the good of which it is susceptible is all
developed. Not to know that any Christian spirit working kindly in its
little sphere, whatever it may be, will find its mortal life too short
for its vast means of usefulness. Not to know that no space of regret
can make amends for one life's opportunities misused! Yet such was I!
Oh! such was I!"

"But you were always a good man of business, Jacob," faltered Scrooge,
who now began to apply this to himself.

"Business!" cried the Ghost, wringing its hands again. "Mankind was my
business. The common welfare was my business; charity, mercy,
forbearance, and benevolence, were, all my business. The dealings of my
trade were but a drop of water in the comprehensive ocean of my
business!"

It held up its chain at arm's length, as if that were the cause of all
its unavailing grief, and flung it heavily upon the ground again.

"At this time of the rolling year," the Spectre said, "I suffer most.
Why did I walk through crowds of fellow-beings with my eyes turned down,
and never raise them to that blessed Star which led the Wise Men to a
poor abode? Were there no poor homes to which its light would have
conducted _me_?"

Scrooge was very much dismayed to hear the Spectre going on at this
rate, and began to quake exceedingly.

"Hear me!" cried the Ghost. "My time is nearly gone."

"I will," said Scrooge. "But don't be hard upon me! Don't be flowery,
Jacob! Pray!"

"How it is that I appear before you in a shape that you can see, I may
not tell. I have sat invisible beside you many and many a day."

It was not an agreeable idea. Scrooge shivered, and wiped the
perspiration from his brow.

"That is no light part of my penance," pursued the Ghost. "I am here
to-night to warn you, that you have yet a chance and hope of escaping my
fate. A chance and hope of my procuring, Ebenezer."

"You were always a good friend to me," said Scrooge. "Thank'ee!"

"You will be haunted," resumed the Ghost, "by Three Spirits."

Scrooge's countenance fell.

"Is that the chance and hope you mentioned. Jacob?" he demanded, in a
faltering voice.

"It is."

"I--I think I'd rather not," said Scrooge.

"Without their visits," said the Ghost, "you cannot hope to shun the
path I tread. Expect the first to-morrow, when the bell tolls One."

"Couldn't I take 'em all at once, and have it over, Jacob?" hinted
Scrooge.

"Expect the second on the next night at the same hour. The third, upon
the next night when the last stroke of Twelve has ceased to vibrate.
Look to see me no more; and look that, for your own sake, you remember
what has passed between us!"

The apparition walked backward from him toward the window, and floated
out upon the bleak, dark night.

Scrooge followed to the window; desperate in his curiosity. He looked
out.

The air was filled with phantoms, wandering hither and thither in
restless haste, and moaning as they went. Every one of them wore chains
like Marley's ghost; some few (they might be guilty governments) were
linked together; none were free. Many had been personally known to
Scrooge in their lives. He had been quite familiar with one old ghost,
in a white waistcoat, with a monstrous iron safe attached to its ankle,
who cried piteously at being unable to assist a wretched woman with an
infant, whom it saw below upon a door-step. The misery with them all
was, clearly, that they sought to interfere, for good, in human matters
and had lost the power for ever.

Whether these creatures faded into mist, or mist enshrouded them, he
could not tell. But they and their spirit voices faded together; and the
night became as it had been when he walked home.

Scrooge closed the window, and examined the door by which the Ghost had
entered. It was double-locked, as he had locked it with his own hands,
and the bolts were undisturbed. He tried to say "Humbug!" but stopped at
the first syllable. And being, from the emotion he had undergone, or the
fatigues of the day, or his glimpse of the Invisible World, or the dull
conversation of the Ghost, or the lateness of the hour, much in need of
repose, went straight to bed, without undressing, and fell asleep upon
the instant.


STAVE TWO.

THE FIRST OF THE THREE SPIRITS.


When Scrooge awoke, it was so dark, that, looking out of bed, he could
scarcely distinguish the transparent window from the opaque walls of his
chamber. He was endeavoring to pierce the darkness with his ferret eyes,
when the chimes of a neighboring church clock struck twelve.

"Why it isn't possible," said Scrooge, "that I can have slept through a
whole day and far into another night!"

Scrooge lay and thought and thought it over and over, and could make
nothing of it. The more he thought, the more perplexed he was, and the
more he endeavored not to think, the more he thought. Marley's ghost
bothered him exceedingly. "Was it a dream or not?"

Scrooge lay in this state until he remembered, on a sudden, that the
Ghost had warned him of a visitation when the bell tolled One. He
resolved to lie awake until the hour was passed; and considering that he
could not go to sleep, this was perhaps the wisest resolution in his
power.

He was more than once convinced he must have sunk into a doze
unconsciously, and missed the clock. At length it broke upon his
listening ear.

"The hour itself," said Scrooge, triumphantly, "nothing else!"

He spoke before the hour bell sounded, which it now did with a deep,
dull, hollow, melancholy ONE. Light flashed up in the room upon the
instant, and the curtains of his bed were drawn.

The curtains of his bed were drawn aside, I tell you, by a hand. Not the
curtains at his feet, nor the curtains at his back, but those to which
his face was addressed. The curtains of his bed were drawn aside; and
Scrooge, starting up into a half-recumbent attitude, found himself face
to face with the visitor who drew them.

It was a strange figure--like a child: yet not so like a child as like
an old man, viewed through some supernatural medium, which gave him the
appearance of having receded from the view, and being diminished to a
child's proportions. Its hair, which hung about its neck and down its
back, was white as if with age; and yet the face had not a wrinkle in
it, and the tenderest bloom was on the skin. The arms were very long and
muscular; the hands the same, as if its hold were of uncommon strength.
Its legs and feet, most delicately formed, were, like those upper
members, bare. It wore a tunic of the purest white; and round its waist
was bound a lustrous belt, the sheen of which was beautiful. It held a
branch of fresh green holly in its hand; and, in singular contradiction
of that wintry emblem, had its dress trimmed with summer flowers. But
the strangest thing about it was, that from the crown of its head there
sprung a bright clear jet of light, by which all this was visible; and
which was doubtless the occasion of its using, in its duller moments, a
great extinguisher for a cap, which it now held under its arm.

"Are you the Spirit, sir, whose coming was foretold to me?" asked
Scrooge.

"I am!"

The voice was soft and gentle. Singularly low, as if instead of being so
close beside him, it were at a distance.

"Who, and what are you?" Scrooge demanded.

"I am the Ghost of Christmas Past."

"Long Past?" inquired Scrooge; observant of its dwarfish stature.

"No. Your past."

Scrooge then made bold to inquire what business brought him there.

"Your welfare!" said the Ghost.

Scrooge expressed himself much obliged, but could not help thinking that
a night of unbroken rest would have been more conducive to that end. The
Spirit must have heard him thinking, for it said immediately:

"Your reclamation, then. Take heed!"

It put out its strong hand as it spoke, and clasped him gently by the
arm.

"Rise! and walk with me!"

It would have been in vain for Scrooge to plead that the weather and the
hour were not adapted to pedestrian purposes; that bed was warm and the
thermometer a long way below freezing; that he was clad but lightly in
his slippers, dressing-gown, and night-cap; and that he had a cold upon
him at the time. The grasp, though gentle as a woman's hand, was not to
be resisted. He rose: but finding that the Spirit made toward the
window, clasped its robe in supplication.

"I am a mortal," Scrooge remonstrated, "and liable to fall."

"Bear but a touch of my hand _there_," said the Spirit, laying it upon
his heart, "and you shall be upheld in more than this!"

As the words were spoken, they passed out, and stood upon an open
country road, with fields on either hand. The city had entirely
vanished. Not a vestige of it was to be seen. The darkness and the mist
had vanished with it, for it was a clear, cold, winter day, with snow
upon the ground.

"Good Spirit!" said Scrooge, clasping his hands together, as he looked
about him. "I was bred in this place. I was a boy here!"

The Spirit gazed upon him mildly. Its gentle touch, though it had been
light and instantaneous, appeared still present to the old man's sense
of feeling. He was conscious of a thousand odors floating in the air,
each one connected with a thousand thoughts, and hopes, and joys, and
cares long, long, forgotten!

"Your lip is trembling," said the Ghost. "And what is that upon your
cheek?"

Scrooge muttered, with an unusual catching in his voice, that it was a
pimple; and begged the Ghost to lead him where he would.

"You recollect the way?" inquired the Spirit.

"Remember it!" cried Scrooge with fervor; "I could walk it blindfold."

"Strange to have forgotten it for so many years!" observed the Ghost.
"Let us go on."

They walked along the road, Scrooge recognizing every gate, and post,
and tree; until a little market-town appeared in the distance, with its
bridge, its church, and winding river. Some shaggy ponies now were seen
trotting toward them with boys upon their backs, who called to other
boys in country gigs and carts, driven by farmers. All these boys were
in great spirits, and shouted to each other, until the broad fields were
so full of merry music, that the crisp air laughed to hear it.

"These are but shadows of the things that have been," said the Ghost.
"They have no consciousness of us."

The jocund travelers came on; and as they came, Scrooge knew and named
them every one. Why was he rejoiced beyond all bounds to see them? Why
did his cold eye glisten, and his heart leap up as they went past? Why
was he filled with gladness when he heard them give each other Merry
Christmas, as they parted at cross-roads and bye-ways, for their several
homes? What was Merry Christmas to Scrooge? Out upon Merry Christmas!
What good had it ever done to him?

"The school is not quite deserted," said the Ghost. "A solitary child,
neglected by his friends, is left there still."

Scrooge said he knew it. And he sobbed.

They left the high-road, by a well remembered lane, and soon approached
a mansion of dull red brick, with a little weathercock-surmounted
cupola, on the roof, and a bell hanging in it. It was a large house, but
one of broken fortunes; for the spacious offices were little used, their
walls were damp and mossy, their windows broken, and their gates
decayed. Fowls clucked and strutted in the stables; and the coach-houses
and sheds were overrun with grass. Nor was it more retentive of its
ancient state within; for entering the dreary hall, and glancing through
the open doors of many rooms, they found them poorly furnished, cold,
and vast. There was an earthy savor in the air, a chilly bareness in the
place, which associated itself somehow with too much getting up by
candle-light, and not too much to eat.

They went, the Ghost and Scrooge, across the hall, to a door at the back
of the house. It opened before them, and disclosed a long, bare,
melancholy room, made barer still by lines of plain deal forms and
desks. At one of these a lonely boy was reading near a feeble fire; and
Scrooge sat down upon a form, and wept to see his poor forgotten self as
he had used to be.

"I wish," Scrooge muttered, putting his hand in his pocket, and looking
about him, after drying his eyes with his cuff: "but it's too late now."

"What is the matter?" asked the Spirit.

"Nothing," said Scrooge. "Nothing. There was a boy singing a Christmas
Carol at my door last night. I should like to have given him something:
that's all."

The Ghost smiled thoughtfully, and waved its hand: saying as it did so,
"Let us see another Christmas!"

Scrooge's former self grew larger at the words, and the room became a
little darker and more dirty. The panels shrunk, the windows cracked;
fragments of plaster fell out of the ceiling, and the naked laths were
shown instead; but how all this was brought about, Scrooge knew no more
than you do. He only knew that it was quite correct: that everything had
happened so: that there he was, alone again, when all the other boys had
gone home for the jolly holidays.

He was not reading now, but walking up and down despairingly. Scrooge
looked at the Ghost, and with a mournful shaking of his head, glanced
anxiously toward the door.

It opened; and a little girl much younger than the boy, came darting in,
and putting her arms about his neck, and often kissing him, addressed
him as her "Dear, dear brother."

"I have come to bring you home, dear brother!" said the child, clapping
her tiny hands, and bending down to laugh. "To bring you home, home,
home!"

"Home, little Fan?" returned the boy.

"Yes," said the child, brimful of glee. "Home, for good and all. Home,
for ever and ever. Father is so much kinder than he used to be, that
home's like Heaven! He spoke so gently to me one dear night when I was
going to bed, that I was not afraid to ask him once more if you might
come home; and he said Yes, you should; and sent me in a coach to bring
you. And you're to be a man!" said the child, opening her eyes; "and are
never to come back here: but first, we're to be together all the
Christmas long, and have the merriest time in all the world."

"You are quite a woman, little Fan!" exclaimed the boy.

She clapped her hands and laughed, and tried to touch his head; but
being too little, laughed again, and stood on tiptoe to embrace him.
Then she began to drag him, in her childish eagerness, toward the door;
and he, nothing loth to go, accompanied her.

A terrible voice in the hall cried, "Bring down Master Scrooge's box,
there!" and in the hall appeared the schoolmaster himself, who glared on
Master Scrooge with a ferocious condescension, and threw him into a
dreadful state of mind by shaking hands with him. Master Scrooge's trunk
being tied on to the top of the chaise, the children bade the
schoolmaster good-bye right willingly; and getting into it, drove gaily
down the garden-sweep: the quick wheels dashing the hoar-frost and snow
from off the dark leaves of the evergreens like spray.

"Always a delicate creature, whom a breath might have withered," said
the Ghost. "But she had a large heart!"

"So she had," cried Scrooge. "You're right. I will not gainsay it
Spirit. God forbid!"

"She died a woman," said the Ghost, "and had, as I think, children."

"One child," Scrooge returned.

"True," said the Ghost. "Your nephew!"

Scrooge seemed uneasy in his mind; and answered briefly, "Yes."

Although they had but that moment left the school behind them, they were
now in the busy thoroughfares of a city, where shadowy passengers passed
and repassed; where shadowy carts and coaches battled for the way, and
all the strife and tumult of a real city were. It was made plain
enough, by the dressing of the shops, that here too it was Christmas
time again; but it was evening, and the streets were lighted up.

The Ghost stopped at a certain warehouse door, and asked Scrooge if he
knew it.

"Know it!" said Scrooge. "Was not I apprenticed here!"

They went in. At sight of an old gentleman in a Welsh wig, sitting
behind such a high desk, that if he had been two inches taller he must
have knocked his head against the ceiling, Scrooge cried in great
excitement:

"Why, it's old Fezziwig! Bless his heart; it's Fezziwig alive again!"

Old Fezziwig laid down his pen, and looked up at the clock, which
pointed to the hour of seven. He rubbed his hands; adjusted his
capacious waistcoat; laughed all over himself, from his shoes to his
organ of benevolence; and called out in a comfortable, oily, rich, fat,
jovial voice:

"Yo ho, there! Ebenezer! Dick!"

Scrooge's former self, now grown a young man, came briskly in,
accompanied by his fellow-'prentice.

"Dick Wilkins, to be sure!" said Scrooge to the Ghost. "Bless me, yes.
There he is. He was very much attached to me, was Dick. Poor Dick! Dear,
dear!"

"Yo ho, my boys!" said Fezziwig, "No more work to-night. Christmas Eve,
Dick, Christmas, Ebenezer. Let's have the shutters up," cried old
Fezziwig, with a sharp clap of his hands, "before a man can say Jack
Robinson!"

You wouldn't believe how those two fellows went at it! They charged into
the street with the shutters--one, two, three--had 'em up in their
places--four, five, six--barred 'em and pinned 'em--seven, eight,
nine--and came back before you could have got to twelve, panting like
race-horses.

"Hilli-ho!" cried old Fezziwig, skipping down from the high desk, with
wonderful agility. "Clear away, my lads, and let's have lots of room
here!"

Clear away! There was nothing they wouldn't have cleared away, or
couldn't have cleared away, with old Fezziwig looking on. It was done in
a minute. Every movable was packed off, as if it were dismissed from
public life for evermore; the floor was swept and watered, the lamps
were trimmed, fuel was heaped upon the fire; and the warehouse was as
snug, and warm, and dry, and bright a play-room as you would desire to
see upon a winter's night.

In came a fiddler with a music-book, and went up to the lofty desk, and
made an orchestra of it, and tuned like fifty stomach-aches. In came
Mrs. Fezziwig, one vast substantial smile. In came the three Miss
Fezziwigs, beaming and lovable. In came all the young men and women
employed in the business. In came the housemaid, with her cousin, the
baker. In came the cook, with her brother's particular friend, the
milkman. In they all came, one after another; some shyly, some boldly,
some gracefully, some awkwardly, some pushing, some pulling; in they all
came, anyhow and everyhow.

There were dances, and there were forfeits, and more dances, and there
was cake, and there was a great piece of Cold Roast, and there was a
great piece of Cold Boiled, and there were mince-pies.

When the clock struck eleven, this domestic ball broke up. Mr. and Mrs.
Fezziwig took their stations, one on either side the door, and shaking
hands with every person individually as he or she went out, wished him
or her a Merry Christmas. When everybody had retired but the two
'prentices they did the same to them; and thus the cheerful voices died
away, and the lads were left to their beds; which were under a counter
in the back-shop.

During the whole of this time, Scrooge had acted like a man out of his
wits. His heart and soul were in the scene, and with his former self. He
corroborated everything, remembered everything, enjoyed everything, and
underwent the strangest agitation. It was not until now, when the bright
faces of his former self and Dick were turned from them, that he
remembered the Ghost, and became conscious that it was looking full upon
him, while the light upon its head burnt very clear.

"A small matter," said the Ghost, "to make these silly folks so full of
gratitude."

"Small!" echoed Scrooge.

The spirit signed to him to listen to the two apprentices, who were
pouring out their hearts in praise of Fezziwig; and when he had done so
said,

"Why! Is it not? He has spent but a few pounds of your mortal money:
three or four, perhaps. Is that so much that he deserves this praise?"

"It isn't that," said Scrooge, heated by the remark, and speaking
unconsciously like his former, not his latter self. "It isn't that,
Spirit. He has the power to render us happy or unhappy; to make our
service light or burdensome; a pleasure or a toil. Say that his power
lies in words and looks; in things so slight and insignificant that it
is impossible to add and count 'em up; what then? The happiness he
gives, is quite as great as if it cost a fortune."

He felt the Spirit's glance, and stopped.

"What is the matter?" asked the Ghost.

"Nothing particular," said Scrooge.

"Something, I think?" the Ghost insisted.

"No," said Scrooge, "No. I should like to be able to say a word or two
to my clerk just now. That's all."

His former self turned down the lamps as he gave utterance to the wish:
and Scrooge and the Ghost again stood side by side in the open air.

"My time grows short," observed the Spirit. "Quick!"

This was not addressed to Scrooge, or to any one whom he could see, but
it produced an immediate effect. For again Scrooge saw himself. He was
older now; a man in the prime of life. His face had not the harsh and
rigid lines of later years; but it had begun to wear the signs of care
and avarice. There was an eager, greedy, restless motion in the eye,
which showed the passion that had taken root, and where the shadow of
the growing tree would fall.

He was not alone, but sat by the side of a fair young girl in a
mourning-dress: in whose eyes there were tears, which sparkled in the
light that shone out of the Ghost of Christmas Past.

"It matters little," she said, softly. "To you, very little. Another
idol has displaced me; and if it can cheer and comfort you in time to
come, as I would have tried to do, I have no just cause to grieve."

"What idol has displaced you?" he rejoined.

"A golden one."

"This is the even-handed dealing of the world!" he said. "There is
nothing on which it is so hard as poverty; and there is nothing it
professes to condemn with such severity as the pursuit of wealth!"

"You fear the world too much," she answered, gently. "All your other
hopes have merged into the hope of being beyond the chance of its sordid
reproach. I have seen your nobler aspirations fall off one by one, until
the master-passion, Gain, engrosses you. Have I not?"

"What then?" he retorted. "Even if I have grown so much wiser, what
then? I am not changed toward you."

She shook her head.

"Am I?"

"Our contract is an old one. It was made when we were both poor and
content to be so, until, in good season, we could improve our worldly
fortune by our patient industry. You _are_ changed. When it was made,
you were another man."

"I was a boy," he said impatiently.

"Your own feeling tells you that you were not what you are," she
returned. "I am. That which promised happiness when we were one in
heart, is fraught with misery now that we are two. How often and how
keenly I have thought of this, I will not say. It is enough that I
_have_ thought of it, and can release you."

"Have I ever sought release?"

"In words. No. Never."

"In what, then?"

"In a changed nature; in an altered spirit; in another atmosphere of
life; another Hope as its great end. In everything that made my love of
any worth or value in your sight. If this had never been between us,"
said the girl, looking mildly, but with steadiness, upon him; "can even
I believe that you would choose a dowerless girl: or, choosing her, do I
not know that your repentance and regret would surely follow? I do; and
I release you. With a full heart, for the love of him you once were."

He was about to speak; but she left him and they parted.

"Spirit!" said Scrooge, "show me no more! Conduct me home. Why do you
delight to torture me?"

"I told you these were shadows of the things that have been," said the
Ghost. "That they are what they are, do not blame me!"

"Remove me!" Scrooge exclaimed. "I cannot bear it!"

He turned upon the Ghost, and seeing that it looked upon him with a
face, in which some strange way there were fragments of all the faces it
had shown him, wrestled with it.

"Leave me! Take me back. Haunt me no longer!"

In the struggle--if that can be called a struggle in which the Ghost,
with no visible resistance on its own part was undisturbed by any effort
of its adversary--Scrooge was conscious of being exhausted, and overcome
by an irresistible drowsiness; and, further, of being in his own
bed-room. He had barely time to reel to bed, before he sank into a heavy
sleep.


STAVE THREE.

THE SECOND OF THE THREE SPIRITS.


Awaking in the middle of a prodigiously tough snore, and sitting up in
bed to get his thoughts together, Scrooge had no occasion to be told
that the bell was again upon the stroke of One. He felt that he was
restored to consciousness in the right nick of time, for the especial
purpose of holding a conference with the second messenger despatched to
him through Jacob Marley's intervention. But, finding that he turned
uncomfortably cold when he began to wonder which of his curtains this
new spectre would draw back, he put them every one aside with his own
hands, and lying down again, established a sharp look-out all round the
bed. For he wished to challenge the Spirit on the moment of its
appearance, and did not wish to be taken by surprise and made nervous.

Now, being prepared for almost anything, he was not by any means
prepared for nothing; and, consequently, when the bell struck One, and
no shape appeared, he was taken with a violent fit of trembling. Five
minutes, ten minutes a quarter of an hour went by, yet nothing came. All
this time, he lay upon his bed, the very core and centre of a blaze of
ruddy light, which streamed upon it when the clock proclaimed the hour;
and which, being only light, was more alarming than a dozen ghosts, as
he was powerless to make out what it meant. At last, however, he began
to think that the source and secret of this ghostly light might be in
the adjoining room, from whence, on further tracing it, it seemed to
shine. This idea taking full possession of his mind, he got up softly
and shuffled in his slippers to the door.

The moment Scrooge's hand was on the lock, a strange voice called him by
his name, and bade him enter. He obeyed.

It was his own room. There was no doubt about that. But it had undergone
a surprising transformation. The walls and ceiling were so hung with
living green, that it looked a perfect grove; from every part of which,
bright gleaming berries glistened. The crisp leaves of holly, mistletoe,
and ivy reflected back the light, as if so many little mirrors had been
scattered there; and such a mighty blaze went roaring up the chimney, as
that dull petrifaction of a hearth had never known in Scrooge's time, or
Marley's, or for many and many a winter season gone. Heaped up on the
floor, to form a kind of throne, were turkeys, geese, game, poultry,
brawn, great joints of meat, sucking-pigs, long wreaths of sausages,
mince-pies, plum-puddings, barrels of oysters, red hot chestnuts,
cherry-cheeked apples, juicy oranges, luscious pears and immense
twelfth-cakes, that made the chamber dim with their delicious steam. In
easy state upon this couch there sat a jolly Giant, glorious to see; who
bore a glowing torch, in shape not unlike Plenty's horn, and held it
up, high up, to shed its light on Scrooge, as he came peeping round the
door.

"Come in!" exclaimed the Ghost "Come in! and know me better, man!"

Scrooge entered timidly, and hung his head before this Spirit. He was
not the dogged Scrooge he had been; and though the Spirit's eyes were
clear and kind, he did not like to meet them.

"I am the Ghost of Christmas Present," said the Spirit: "Look upon me!
You have never seen the like of me before!" exclaimed the Spirit.

"Never," Scrooge made answer to it.

"Have never walked forth with the younger members of my family; meaning
(for I am very young) my elder brothers born in these later years?"
pursued the Phantom.

"I don't think I have," said Scrooge. "I am afraid I have not. Have you
had many brothers, Spirit?"

"More than eighteen hundred," said the Ghost.

"A tremendous family to provide for," muttered Scrooge.

The Ghost of Christmas Present rose.

"Spirit," said Scrooge, submissively, "conduct me where you will. I went
forth last night on compulsion, and I learnt a lesson which is working
now. To-night, if you have aught to teach me, let me profit by it."

"Touch my robe!"

Scrooge did as he was told, and held it fast.

The whole scene vanished instantly and they stood in the city streets on
Christmas morning, where (for the weather was severe) the people made a
rough, but brisk and not unpleasant kind of music, in scraping the snow
from the pavement in front of their dwellings, and from the tops of
their houses, whence it was mad delight to the boys to see it come
plumping down into the road below, and splitting into artificial little
snowstorms.

Perhaps it was the pleasure the good Spirit had in showing his sympathy
with all poor men, that led him straight to Scrooge's clerk's; for there
he went, and took Scrooge with him, holding to his robe; and on the
threshold of the door the spirit smiled, and stopped to bless Bob
Cratchit's dwelling with the sprinklings of his torch.

Then up rose Mrs. Cratchit, Cratchit's wife, dressed out but poorly in a
twice-turned gown, but brave in ribbons, which are cheap and make a
goodly show; and she laid the cloth, assisted by Belinda Cratchit,
second of her daughters, also brave in ribbons; while Master Peter
Cratchit plunged a fork into the saucepan of potatoes. And now two
smaller Cratchits, boy and girl, came tearing in, screaming that outside
the baker's they had smelt the goose, and known it for their own.

"What has ever got your precious father, then?" said Mrs. Cratchit. "And
your brother, Tiny Tim! And Martha warn't as late last Christmas Day by
half-an-hour!"

"Here's Martha, mother," said a girl appearing as she spoke.

"Here's Martha, mother," cried the two young Cratchits. "Hurrah! There's
_such_ a goose, Martha!"

"Why, bless your heart alive, my dear, how late you are!" said Mrs.
Cratchit, kissing her a dozen times, and taking off her shawl and bonnet
for her with officious zeal.

"We'd a deal of work to finish up last night," replied the girl, "and
had to clear away this morning, mother!"

"Well! never mind so long as you are come," said Mrs. Cratchit. "Sit ye
down before the fire, my dear, and have a warm, Lord bless ye!"

"No no! There's father coming," cried the two young Cratchits, who were
everywhere at once. "Hide, Martha, hide!"

So Martha hid herself, and in came little Bob, the father, with at least
three feet of comforter exclusive of the fringe hanging down before him;
and his threadbare clothes darned up and brushed, to look seasonable;
and Tiny Tim upon his shoulder. Alas for Tiny Tim, he bore a little
crutch, and had his limbs supported by an iron frame!

"Why, Where's our Martha?" cried Bob Cratchit looking round.

"Not coming," said Mrs. Cratchit.

"Not coming!" said Bob, with a sudden declension in his high spirits;
for he had been Tim's blood horse all the way from church, and had come
home rampant. "Not coming upon Christmas Day!"

Martha didn't like to see him disappointed, if it were only in joke; so
she came out prematurely from behind the closet door, and ran into his
arms, while the two young Cratchits hustled Tiny Tim, and bore him off
into the wash-house, that he might hear the pudding singing in the
copper.

"And how did little Tim behave?" asked Mrs. Cratchit, when she had
rallied Bob on his credulity, and Bob had hugged his daughter to his
heart's content.

"As good as gold," said Bob, "and better. Somehow he gets thoughtful,
sitting by himself so much, and thinks the strangest things you ever
heard. He told me, coming home, that he hoped the people saw him in the
church, because he was a cripple, and it might be pleasant to them to
remember upon Christmas Day, who made lame beggars walk and blind men
see."

Bob's voice was tremulous when he told them this, and trembled more when
he said that Tiny Tim was growing strong and hearty.

His active little crutch was heard upon the floor, and back came Tiny
Tim before another word was spoken, escorted by his brother and sister
to his stool beside the fire; and Master Peter and the two ubiquitous
young Cratchits went to fetch the goose, with which they soon returned
in high procession.

Mrs. Cratchit made the gravy (ready beforehand in a little saucepan)
hissing hot; Master Peter mashed the potatoes with incredible vigor;
Miss Belinda sweetened up the apple sauce; Martha dusted the hot-plates;
Bob took Tiny Tim beside him in a tiny corner at the table; the two
young Cratchits set chairs for everybody, not forgetting themselves, and
mounting guard upon their posts, crammed spoons into their mouths, lest
they should shriek for goose before their turn came to be helped. At
last the dishes were set on, and grace was said. It was succeeded by a
breathless pause, as Mrs. Cratchit, looking slowly all along the
carving-knife, prepared to plunge it in the breast; but when she did,
and when the long-expected gush of stuffing issued forth, one murmur of
delight arose all round the board, and even Tiny Tim, excited by the two
young Cratchits, beat on the table with the handle of his knife, and
feebly cried Hurrah!

There never was such a goose. Bob said he didn't believe there ever was
such a goose cooked. Its tenderness and flavor, size and cheapness, were
the themes of universal admiration. Eked out by apple sauce and mashed
potatoes, it was a sufficient dinner for the whole family; indeed, as
Mrs. Cratchit said with great delight (surveying one small atom of a
bone upon the dish), they hadn't ate it all at last! Yet every one had
had enough. But now the plates being changed by Miss Belinda, Mrs.
Cratchit left the room alone--too nervous to bear witnesses--to take the
pudding up, and bring it in.

Oh, a wonderful pudding! Bob Cratchit said, and calmly too, that he
regarded it as the greatest success achieved by Mrs. Cratchit since
their marriage. Mrs. Cratchit said that now the weight was off her mind,
she would confess she had her doubts about the quantity of flour.
Everybody had something to say about it, but nobody said or thought it
was at all a small pudding for a large family. It would have been flat
heresy to do so. Any Cratchit would have blushed to hint at such a
thing.

At last the dinner was all done, the cloth was cleared, the hearth
swept, and the fire made up. Apples and oranges were put upon the table
and a shovelful of chestnuts on the fire. Then all the Cratchit family
drew round the hearth, in what Bob Cratchit called a circle, meaning
half a one. Then Bob proposed: "A Merry Christmas to all, my dears. God
bless us!"

Which all the family re-echoed.

"God bless us, every one!" said Tiny Tim, the last of all.

He sat very close to his father's side, upon his little stool. Bob held
his withered little hand in his, as if he loved the child and wished to
keep him by his side, and dreaded that he might be taken from him.

"Spirit," said Scrooge, with an interest he had never felt before, "tell
me if Tiny Tim will live."

"I see a vacant seat," replied the Ghost, "in the poor chimney corner,
and a crutch without an owner, carefully preserved. If these shadows
remain unaltered by the Future the child will die."

"No, no," said Scrooge. "Oh, no, kind Spirit! say he will be spared."

"If these shadows remain unaltered by the Future none other of my race,"
returned the Ghost, "will find him here. What then? If he be like to
die, he had better do it, and decrease the surplus population."

Scrooge hung his head to hear his own words quoted by the Spirit, and
was overcome with penitence and grief.

"Man," said the Ghost, "if man you be in heart, not adamant, forbear
that wicked cant until you have discovered what the surplus is and where
it is. Will you decide what men shall live, what men shall die? It may
be that in the sight of Heaven you are more worthless and less fit to
live than millions like this poor man's child. Oh, God! to hear the
insect on the leaf pronouncing on the too much life among his hungry
brothers in the dust!"

Scrooge bent before the Ghost's rebuke, and trembling cast his eyes upon
the ground. But he raised them speedily on hearing his own name.

"Mr. Scrooge!" said Bob; "I'll give you Mr. Scrooge, the Founder of the
Feast!"

"The Founder of the Feast indeed!" cried Mrs. Cratchit, reddening. "I
wish I had him here. I'd give him a piece of my mind to feast upon, and
I hope he'd have a good appetite for it."

"My dear," said Bob, "the children! Christmas day."

Scrooge was the Ogre of the family. The mention of his name cast a dark
shadow on the party, which was not dispelled for full five minutes.

After it had passed away, they were ten times merrier than before, from
the mere relief of Scrooge the Baleful being done with. Bob Cratchit
told them how he had a situation in his eye for Master Peter. The two
young Cratchits laughed tremendously at the idea of Peter's being a man
of business; and Peter himself looked thoughtfully at the fire from
between his collars, as if he were deliberating what particular
investments he should favor when he came into receipt of the bewildering
income. Martha, who was a poor apprentice at a milliner's, then told
them what kind of work she had to do, and how many hours she worked at
a stretch, and how she meant to be abed to-morrow morning for a good
long rest, to-morrow being a holiday she passed at home. Also how she
had seen a countess and a lord some days before, and how the lord "was
much about as tall as Peter," at which Peter pulled up his collars so
high that you couldn't have seen his head if you had been there. By and
by they had a song, about a lost child traveling in the snow, from Tiny
Tim, who had a plaintive little voice, and sang it very well indeed.

There was nothing of high mark in this. They were not a handsome family;
they were not well dressed; their shoes were far from being waterproof;
their clothes were scanty; and Peter might have known, and very likely
did, the inside of a pawnbroker's. But they were happy, grateful,
pleased with one another, and contented with the time; and when they
faded, and looked happier yet in the bright sprinklings of the Spirit's
torch at parting, Scrooge had his eye upon them, and especially on Tiny
Tim, until the last.

By this time it was getting dark and snowing pretty heavily; and as
Scrooge and the Spirit went along the streets, the brightness of the
roaring fires in kitchens, parlors, and all sorts of rooms, was
wonderful. Here, the flickering of the blaze showed preparations for a
cosy dinner, with hot plates baking through and through before the fire,
and deep red curtains, ready to be drawn to shut out cold and darkness.
There, all the children of the house were running out into the snow to
meet their married sisters, brothers, cousins, uncles, aunts, and be the
first to greet them.

It was a great surprise to Scrooge, as he meditated on these scenes, to
hear a hearty laugh. It was a much greater surprise to Scrooge to
recognize it as his own nephew's, and to find himself in a bright, dry,
gleaming room, with the Spirit standing smiling by his side, and looking
at that same nephew with approving affability!

"Ha! ha!" laughed Scrooge's nephew. "Ha! ha! ha!"

If you should happen, by any unlikely chance, to know a man more blessed
in a laugh than Scrooge's nephew, all I can say is, I should like to
know him too. Introduce him to me, and I'll cultivate his acquaintance.

It is a fair, even-handed, noble adjustment of things that while there
is infection in disease and sorrow, there is nothing in the world so
irresistibly contagious as laughter and good-humor. When Scrooge's
nephew laughed in this way, holding his sides, rolling his head, and
twisting his face into the most extravagant contortions, Scrooge's
niece, by marriage, laughed as heartily as he. And their assembled
friends being not a bit behindhand, roared out lustily.

"Ha, ha! Ha, ha, ha, ha!"

"He said that Christmas was a humbug, as I live!" cried Scrooge's
nephew. "He believed it, too."

"More shame for him, Fred!" said Scrooge's niece, indignantly. Bless
those women! they never do anything by halves. They are always in
earnest.

She was very pretty; exceedingly pretty. With a dimpled,
surprised-looking, capital face; a ripe little mouth that seemed made to
be kissed--as no doubt it was; all kinds of good little dots about her
chin, that melted into one another when she laughed; and the sunniest
pair of eyes you ever saw in any little creature's head. Altogether she
was what you would have called provoking, you know; but satisfactory,
too. Oh, perfectly satisfactory.

"He's a comical old fellow," said Scrooge's nephew, "that's the truth:
and not so pleasant as he might be. However, his offences carry their
own punishment, and I have nothing to say against him."

"I have no patience with him," observed Scrooge's niece. Scrooge's
niece's sisters, and all the other ladies, expressed the same opinion.

"Oh, I have!" said Scrooge's nephew. "I am sorry for him; I couldn't be
angry with him if I tried. Who suffers by his ill whims! Himself,
always. Here, he takes it into his head to dislike us, and he won't come
and dine with us. What's the consequence? He don't lose much of a
dinner."

"Indeed, I think he loses a very good dinner," interrupted Scrooge's
niece. Everybody else said the same, and they must be allowed to have
been competent judges, because they had just had dinner; and with the
dessert upon the table, were clustered round the fire, by lamp-light.

"Well! I am very glad to hear it," said Scrooge's nephew, "because I
haven't any great faith in these young housekeepers. What do _you_ say,
Topper?"

Topper had clearly got his eye upon one of Scrooge's niece's sisters,
for he answered that a bachelor was a wretched outcast, who had no right
to express an opinion on the subject. Whereat Scrooge's niece's
sister--the plump one with the lace tucker: not the one with the
roses--blushed.

"Do go on, Fred," said Scrooge's niece, clapping her hands. "He never
finishes what he begins to say! He is such a ridiculous fellow!"

"I was only going to say," said Scrooge's nephew, "that the consequence
of his taking a dislike to us, and not making merry with us, is, as I
think, that he loses some pleasant moments, which could do him no harm.
I am sure he loses pleasanter companions than he can find in his own
thoughts, either in his mouldy old office, or his dusty chambers. I mean
to give him the same chance every year, whether he likes it or not, for
I pity him. He may rail at Christmas till he dies, but he can't help
thinking better of it--I defy him--if he finds me going there, in good
temper, year after year, and saying, 'Uncle Scrooge, how are you?' If it
only puts him in the vein to leave his poor clerk fifty pounds, _that's_
something; and I think I shook him yesterday."

It was their turn to laugh now, at the notion of his shaking Scrooge.
But being thoroughly goodnatured, and not much caring what they laughed
at, so that they laughed at any rate, he encouraged them in their
merriment.

After tea they had some music, Scrooge's niece played well; and played
among other tunes a simple little air (a mere nothing: you might learn
to whistle it in two minutes), which had been familiar to the child who
fetched Scrooge from the boarding-school, as he had been reminded by the
Ghost of Christmas Past. When this strain of music sounded, all the
things that the Ghost had shown him, came upon his mind; he softened
more and more; and thought that if he could have listened to it often,
years ago, he might have cultivated the kindnesses of life for his own
happiness with his own hands, without resorting to the sexton's spade
that buried Jacob Marley.

But they didn't devote the whole evening to music. After awhile they
played at forfeits; for it is good to be children sometimes, and never
better than at Christmas, when its mighty founder was a child himself.

Stop! There was first a glorious game at blindman's buff. Of course
there was. And I no more believe Topper was really blind than I believe
he had eyes in his boots. My opinion is, that it was a done thing
between him and Scrooge's nephew; and that the Ghost of Christmas
Present knew it. The way he went after that plump sister in the lace
tucker, was an outrage on the credulity of human nature. Knocking down
the fire-irons, tumbling over the chairs, bumping up against the piano,
smothering himself amongst the curtains, wherever she went, there went
he! He always knew where the plump sister was. He wouldn't catch anybody
else. If you had fallen up against him, (as some of them did) on
purpose, he would have made a feint of endeavoring to seize you, which
would have been an affront to your understanding, and would instantly
have sidled off in the direction of the plump sister. She often cried
out that it wasn't fair; and it really was not. But when at last, he
caught her; when, in spite of all her silken rustlings, and her rapid
flutterings past him, he got her into a corner whence there was no
escape; then his conduct was the most execrable. For his pretending not
to know her; his pretending that it was necessary to touch her
head-dress, and further to assure himself of her identity by pressing a
certain ring upon her finger, and a certain chain about her neck; was
vile, monstrous! No doubt she told him her opinion of it when, another
blind-man being in office, they were so very confidential together,
behind the curtains.

Scrooge's niece was not one of the blind-man's buff party, but was made
comfortable with a large chair and a footstool, in a snug corner where
the Ghost and Scrooge were close behind her. But she joined in the
forfeits, and loved her love to admiration with all the letters of the
alphabet. Likewise at the game of How, When, and Where, she was very
great, and, to the secret joy of Scrooge's nephew, beat her sisters
hollow: though they were sharp girls too, as Topper could have told you.
There might have been twenty people there, young and old, but they all
played, and so did Scrooge; for, wholly forgetting in the interest he
had in what was going on, that his voice made no sound in their ears, he
sometimes came out with his guess quite loud, and very often guessed
right, too; for the sharpest needle, warranted not to cut in the eye,
was not sharper than Scrooge; blunt as he took it in his head to be.

The Ghost was greatly pleased to find him in this mood, and looked upon
him with such favor, that he begged like a boy to be allowed to stay
until the guests departed. But this the Spirit said could not be done.
The whole scene passed off; and he and the Spirit were again upon their
travels.

Much they saw, and far they went, and many homes they visited, but
always with a happy end. The Spirit stood beside sick beds, and they
were cheerful; on foreign lands, and they were close at home; by
struggling men, and they were patient in their greater hope; by poverty,
and it was rich. In almshouse, hospital, and jail, in misery's every
refuge, where vain man in his little brief authority had not made fast
the door, and barred the Spirit out, he left his blessing, and taught
Scrooge his precepts.

It was a long night, if it were only a night; but Scrooge had his doubts
of this, because the Christmas Holidays appeared to be condensed into
the space of time they passed together. It was strange, too, that while
Scrooge remained unaltered in his outward form, the Ghost grew older,
clearly older!

"Forgive me if I am not justified in what I ask," said Scrooge, looking
intently at the Spirit's robe, "but I see something strange, and not
belonging to yourself, protruding from your skirts. Is it a foot or a
claw?"

"It might be a claw, for the flesh there is upon it," was the Spirit's
sorrowful reply. "Look here."

From the foldings of its robe, it brought two children; wretched,
abject, frightful, hideous, miserable. They knelt down at its feet, and
clung upon the outside of its garment.

They were a boy and girl. Yellow, meagre, ragged, scowling, wolfish; but
prostrate, too, in their humility. Where graceful youth should have
filled their features out, and touched them with its freshest tints, a
stale and shriveled hand, like that of age, had pinched, and twisted
them, and pulled them into shreds. Where angels might have sat
enthroned, devils lurked, and glared out menacing. No change, no
degradation, no perversion of humanity, in any grade, through all the
mysteries of wonderful creation, has monsters half so horrible and
dread.

Scrooge started back, appalled. Having them shown to him in this way, he
tried to say they were fine children, but the words choked themselves,
rather than be parties to a lie of such enormous magnitude.

"Spirit, are they yours?" Scrooge could say no more.

"They are Man's," said the Spirit, looking down upon them. "And they
cling to me, appealing from their fathers. This boy is Ignorance. This
girl is Want. Beware of them both, and all of their degree, but most of
all beware of this boy."

"Have they no refuge or resource?" cried Scrooge.

"Are there no prisons?" said the Spirit, turning on him for the last
time with his own words. "Are there no work-houses?"

The bell struck twelve.

Scrooge looked about him for the Ghost, and saw it not. As the last
stroke ceased to vibrate, he remembered the prediction of old Jacob
Marley, and lifting up his eyes, beheld a solemn Phantom, draped and
hooded, coming like a mist along the ground toward him.


STAVE FOUR.

THE LAST OF THE SPIRITS.


The Phantom slowly, gravely, silently, approached. When it came near
him, Scrooge bent down upon his knee; for in the very air through which
this Spirit moved it seemed to scatter gloom and mystery.

It was shrouded in a deep black garment, which concealed its head, its
face, its form, and left nothing of it visible, save one outstretched
hand. But for this it would have been difficult to detach its figure
from the night, and separate it from the darkness by which it was
surrounded.

He felt that it was tall and stately when it came beside him, and that
its mysterious presence filled him with a solemn dread. He knew no more,
for the Spirit neither spoke nor moved.

"I am in the presence of the Ghost of Christmas Yet To Come?" said
Scrooge.

The Spirit answered not, but pointed onward with its hand.

"You are about to show me shadows of the things that have not happened,
but will happen in the time before us," Scrooge pursued. "Is that so,
Spirit?"

The upper portion of the garment was contracted for an instant in its
folds, as if the Spirit had inclined its head. That was the only answer
he received.

Although well used to ghostly company by this time, Scrooge feared the
silent shape so much that his legs trembled beneath him, and he found
that he could hardly stand when he prepared to follow it. The Spirit
paused a moment, as observing his condition, and giving him time to
recover.

But Scrooge was all the worse for this. It thrilled him with a vague
uncertain horror, to know that behind the dusky shroud, there were
ghostly eyes intently fixed upon him, while he, though he stretched his
own to the utmost, could see nothing but a spectral hand and one great
heap of black.

"Ghost of the Future!" he exclaimed, "I fear you more than any spectre I
have seen. But as I know your purpose is to do me good and as I hope to
live to be another man from what I was, I am prepared to bear you
company, and do it with a thankful heart. Will you not speak to me?"

It gave him no reply. The hand was pointed straight before them.

"Lead on!" said Scrooge. "Lead on! The night is waning fast, and it is
precious time to me, I know. Lead on, Spirit!"

The Phantom moved away as it had come toward him. Scrooge followed in
the shadow of its dress, which bore him up, he thought, and carried him
along.

They scarcely seemed to enter the city; for the city rather seemed to
spring up about them, and encompass them of its own act. But there they
were in the heart of it; on 'Change, amongst the merchants; who hurried
up and down, and chinked the money in their pockets, and conversed in
groups, and looked at their watches, and trifled thoughtfully with their
great gold seals; and so forth, as Scrooge had seen them often.

The Spirit stopped beside one little knot of business men. Observing
that the hand was pointed to them, Scrooge advanced to listen to their
talk.

"No," said a great fat man with a monstrous chin, "I don't know much
about it either way. I only know he's dead."

"When did he die?" inquired another.

"Last night, I believe."

"What has he done with his money?" asked a red-faced gentleman with a
pendulous excrescence on the end of his nose, that shook like the gills
of a turkey-cock.

"I haven't heard," said the man with the large chin, yawning again.
"Left it to his company, perhaps. He hasn't left it to _me_. That's all
I know."

This pleasantry was received with a general laugh.

"It's likely to be a very cheap funeral," said the same speaker; "for
upon my life I don't know of anybody to go to it. Suppose we make up a
party and volunteer?"

"I don't mind going if a lunch is provided," observed the gentleman with
the excrescence on his nose. "But I must be fed, if I make one."

Another laugh.

"Well, I am the most disinterested among you, after all," said the first
speaker, "for I never wear black gloves, and I never eat lunch. But I'll
offer to go, if anybody else will. When I come to think of it, I'm not
at all sure that I wasn't his most particular friend; for we used to
stop and speak whenever we met. Bye, bye!"

Speakers and listeners strolled away, and mixed with other groups.
Scrooge knew the men, and looked toward the Spirit for explanation. He
was at first inclined to be surprised that the Spirit should attach
importance to conversations apparently so trivial; but feeling assured
that they must have some hidden purpose, he set himself to consider what
it was likely to be. They could scarcely be supposed to have any bearing
on the death of Jacob, his old partner, for that was past, and this
Ghost's province was the future. Nor could he think of any one
immediately connected with himself, to whom he could apply them.

They left the busy scene, and went into an obscure part of the town,
where Scrooge had never penetrated before, although he recognized its
situation and its bad repute. The ways were foul and narrow; the shops
and houses wretched; the people half-naked, drunken, slipshod, ugly.
Alleys and archways, like so many cesspools, disgorged their offences of
smell, and dirt, and life, upon the straggling streets; and the whole
quarter reeked with crime, with filth and misery.

Far in this den of infamous resort, there was a low-browed, beetling
shop, below a pent-house roof, where iron, old rags, bottles, bones, and
greasy offal were bought. Upon the floor within, were piled up heaps of
rusty keys, nails, chains, hinges, files, scales, weights, and refuse
iron of all kinds. Secrets that few would like to scrutinize were bred
and hidden in mountains of unseemly rags, masses of corrupted fat, and
sepulchres of bones. Sitting in among the wares he dealt in, by a
charcoal stove, made of old bricks, was a grey-haired rascal, nearly
seventy years of age; who had screened himself from the cold air
without, by a frowsy curtaining of miscellaneous tatters hung upon a
line; and smoked his pipe in all the luxury of calm retirement.

Scrooge and the Phantom came into the presence of this man, just as a
woman with a heavy bundle slunk into the shop. But she had scarcely
entered, when another woman, similarly laden, came in too; and she was
closely followed by a man in faded black, who was no less startled by
the sight of them, than they had been upon the recognition of each
other. After a short period of blank astonishment, in which the old man
with a pipe had joined them, they all three burst into a laugh.

"Let the charwoman alone to be the first!" cried she who had entered
first. "Let the laundress alone to be the second; and let the
undertaker's man alone to be the third. Look here, old Joe, here's a
chance! If we haven't all three met here without meaning it!"

"You couldn't have met in a better place," said old Joe, removing his
pipe from his mouth. "Come into the parlor."

The parlor was the space behind the screen of rags. The old man raked
the fire together with an old stair-rod, and having trimmed his smoky
lamp (for it was night), with the stem of his pipe, put it into his
mouth again.

While he did this, the woman who had already spoken threw her bundle on
the floor and sat down in a flaunting manner on a stool; crossing her
elbows on her knees, and looking with a bold defiance at the other two.
"Now, then!" cried the woman. "Who's the worse for the loss of a few
things like these? Not a dead man, I suppose."

"No, indeed," said Mrs. Dilber, laughing.

"If he wanted to keep 'em after he was dead, a wicked old screw,"
pursued the woman, "why wasn't he natural in his lifetime? If he had
been, he'd have had somebody to look after him when he was struck with
Death, instead of lying gasping out his last there, alone by himself."

"It's the truest word that ever was spoke," said Mrs. Dilber. "It's a
judgment on him."

"I wish it was a little heavier judgment," replied the woman; "and it
should have been, you may depend upon it, if I could have laid my hands
on anything else. Open that bundle, old Joe, and let me know the value
of it. Speak out plain. I'm not afraid to be the first, nor afraid for
them to see it. We knew pretty well that we were helping ourselves,
before we met here, I believe. Open the bundle, Joe."

But the gallantry of her friends would not allow of this; and the man in
faded black, mounting the breach first, produced _his_ plunder. It was
not extensive. A seal or two, a pencil-case, a pair of sleeve buttons,
and a brooch of no great value, were all. They were severally examined
and appraised by old Joe, who chalked the sums he was disposed to give
for each, upon the wall, and added them up into a total when he found
that there was nothing more to come.

"That's your account," said Joe, "and I wouldn't give another sixpence,
if I was to be boiled for not doing it. Who's next?"

Mrs. Dilber was next. Sheets and towels, a little wearing apparel, two
old-fashioned silver teaspoons, a pair of sugar-tongs, and a few boots.
Her account was stated on the wall in the same manner.

"I always give too much to ladies. It's a weakness of mine, and that's
the way I ruin myself," said old Joe. "That's your account. If you asked
me for another penny, and made it an open question, I'd repent of being
so liberal, and knock off half-a-crown."

"And now undo _my_ bundle, Joe," said the first woman.

Joe went down on his knees for the greater convenience of opening it,
and having unfastened a great many knots, dragged out a large heavy roll
of some dark stuff.

"What do you call this?" said Joe. "Bed curtains!"

"Ah!" returned the woman, laughing and leaning forward on her crossed
arms. "Bed curtains!"

"You don't mean to say you took 'em down rings and all, with him lying
there?" said Joe.

"Yes, I do," replied the woman. "Why not?"

"You were born to make your fortune," said Joe, "and you'll certainly do
it."

"I certainly shan't hold my hand, when I can get anything in it by
reaching it out, for the sake of such a man as he was, I promise you,
Joe," returned the woman coolly. "Don't drop that oil upon the blankets,
now."

"His blankets?" asked Joe.

"Whose else's do you think?" replied the woman. "He isn't likely to take
cold without 'em, I dare say."

"I hope he didn't die of anything catching? Eh?" said old Joe, stopping
in his work, and looking up.

"Don't you be afraid of that," returned the woman. "I an't so fond of
his company that I'd loiter about him for such things, if he did. Ah!
you may look through that shirt till your eyes ache; but you won't find
a hole in it, nor a threadbare place. It's the best he had, and a fine
one too. They'd have wasted it, if it hadn't been for me."

"What do you call wasting of it?" asked old Joe.

"Putting it on him to be buried in, to be sure," replied the woman with
a laugh. "Somebody was fool enough to do it, but I took it off again. If
calico ain't good enough for such a purpose, it isn't good enough for
anything. It's quite as becoming to the body. He can't look uglier than
he did in that one."

Scrooge listened to this dialogue in horror. As they sat grouped about
their spoil, in the scanty light afforded by the old man's lamp, he
viewed them with a detestation and disgust, which could hardly have been
greater, though they had been obscene demons, marketing the corpse
itself.

"Ha, ha!" laughed the same woman, when old Joe, producing a flannel bag
with money in it, told out their several gains upon the ground. "This is
the end of it, you see? He frightened everyone away from him when he was
alive, to profit us when he was dead! Ha! ha! ha!"

"Spirit!" said Scrooge, shuddering from head to foot, "I see, I see. The
case of this unhappy man might be my own. My life tends that way, now.
Merciful Heaven, what is this?"

He recoiled in terror, for the scene had changed, and now he almost
touched a bed: a bare, uncurtained bed: on which, beneath a ragged
sheet, there lay a something covered up which, though it was dumb,
announced itself in awful language.

The room was very dark, too dark to be observed with any accuracy,
though Scrooge glanced round it in obedience to a secret impulse,
anxious to know what kind of room it was. A pale light rising in the
outer air, fell straight upon the bed: and on it, plundered and bereft,
unwatched, unwept, uncared for, was the body of this man.

Scrooge glanced toward the Phantom. Its steady hand was pointed to the
head. The cover was so carelessly adjusted that the slightest raising of
it, the motion of a finger upon Scrooge's part, would have disclosed the
face. He thought of it, felt how easy it would be to do, and longed to
do it; but had no more power to withdraw the veil than to dismiss the
spectre at his side.

"Spirit!" he said, "this is a fearful place. In leaving it, I shall not
leave its lesson, trust me. Let us go!"

Still the Ghost pointed with an unmoved finger to the head.

"I understand you," Scrooge returned, "and I would do it if I could. But
I have not the power, Spirit. I have not the power."

Again it seemed to look upon him.

"If there is any person in the town, who feels emotion caused by this
man's death," said Scrooge, quite agonized, "show that person to me,
Spirit, I beseech you!"

The phantom spread its dark robe before him for a moment, like a wing;
and withdrawing it, revealed a room by daylight, where a mother and her
children were.

She was expecting some one, and with anxious eagerness; for she walked
up and down the room; started at every sound; looked out from the
window; glanced at the clock; tried, but in vain, to work with her
needle; and could hardly bear the voices of her children in their play.

At length the long-expected knock was heard. She hurried to the door and
met her husband; a man whose face was care-worn and depressed, though he
was young. There was a remarkable expression in it now; a kind of
serious delight of which he felt ashamed, and which he struggled to
repress.

He sat down to the dinner that had been hoarding for him by the fire,
and when she asked him faintly what news (which was not until after a
long silence), he appeared embarrassed how to answer.

"Is it good," she said, "or bad?"--to help him.

"Bad," he answered.

"We are quite ruined?"

"No. There is hope yet, Caroline."

"If _he_ relents," she said, amazed, "there is! Nothing is past hope, if
such a miracle has happened."

"He is past relenting," said her husband. "He is dead."

She was a mild and patient creature, if her face spoke truth; but she
was thankful in her soul to hear it, and she said so, with clasped
hands. She prayed forgiveness the next moment, and was sorry: but the
first was the emotion of her heart.

"What the half-drunken woman, whom I told you of last night, said to
me, when I tried to see him and obtain a week's delay: and what I
thought was a mere excuse to avoid me, turns out to have been quite
true. He was not only very ill, but dying, then."

"To whom will our debt be transferred?"

"I don't know. But before that time we shall be ready with the money;
and even though we were not, it would be bad fortune indeed to find so
merciless a creditor in his successor. We may sleep to-night with light
hearts, Caroline!"

Yes. Soften it as they would, their hearts were lighter. The children's
faces, hushed and clustered round to hear what they so little
understood, were brighter; and it was a happier house for this man's
death! The only emotion that the Ghost could show him, caused by the
event, was one of pleasure.

"Let me see some tenderness connected with the death," said Scrooge; "or
that dark chamber, Spirit, which we left just now, will be for ever
present to me."

The Ghost conducted him through several streets to poor Bob Cratchit's
house; the dwelling he had visited before: and found the mother and the
children seated round the fire.

Quiet. Very quiet. The noisy little Cratchits were as still as statues
in one corner, and sat looking up at Peter, who had a book before him.
The mother and her daughters were sewing. But surely they were very
quiet!

"'And He took a child, and set him in the midst of them.'"

Where had Scrooge heard those words? He had not dreamed them. The boy
must have read them out, as he and the Spirit crossed the threshold. Why
did he not go on?

The mother laid her work upon the table, and put her hand up to her
face.

"The color hurts my eyes," she said.

The color? Ah, poor Tiny Tim!

"They're better now again," said Cratchit's wife. "It makes them weak by
candle-light; and I wouldn't show weak eyes to your father when he comes
home, for the world. It must be near his time."

"Past it rather," Peter answered, shutting up his book. "But I think he
has walked a little slower than he used, these few last evenings,
mother."

They were very quiet again. At last she said, and in a steady, cheerful
voice, that only faltered once:

"I have known him walk with--I have known him walk with Tiny Tim upon
his shoulder, very fast indeed."

"And so have I," cried Peter. "Often."

"And so have I," exclaimed another. So had all.

"But he was very light to carry," she resumed, intent upon her work,
"and his father loved him so, that it was no trouble: no trouble. And
there is your father at the door!"

She hurried out to meet him; and little Bob in his comforter--he had
need of it, poor fellow--came in. His tea was ready for him, and they
all tried who should help him to it most. Then the two young Cratchits
got upon his knees and laid, each child, a little cheek against his
face, as if they said, "Don't mind it, father. Don't be grieved!"

Bob was very cheerful with them, and spoke pleasantly to all the family.
He looked at the work upon the table, and praised the industry and speed
of Mrs. Cratchit and the girls. They would be done long before Sunday,
he said.

"Sunday! You went to-day, then, Robert?" said his wife.

"Yes, my dear," returned Bob. "I wish you could have gone. It would
have done you good to see how green a place it is. But you'll see it
often. I promised him that I would walk there on a Sunday. My little,
little child!" cried Bob. "My little child!"

He broke down all at once. He couldn't help it. If he could have helped
it, he and his child would have been farther apart perhaps than they
were.

"Spectre," said Scrooge, "something informs me that our parting moment
is at hand. I know it, but I know not how. Tell me what man that was
whom we saw lying dead?"

The Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come conveyed him as before into the
resorts of business men, but showed him not himself. Indeed, the Spirit
did not stay for anything, but went straight on, as to the end just now
desired, until besought by Scrooge to tarry for a moment.

"This court," said Scrooge, "through which we hurry now, is where my
place of occupation is, and has been for a length of time. I see the
house. Let me behold what I shall be, in days to come."

The Spirit stopped; the hand was pointed elsewhere.

"The house is yonder" Scrooge exclaimed. "Why do you point away?"

The inexorable finger underwent no change.

Scrooge hastened to the window of his office, and looked in. It was an
office still, but not his. The furniture was not the same, and the
figure in the chair was not himself. The Phantom pointed as before.

He joined it once again, and wondering why and whither he had gone,
accompanied it until they reached an iron gate. He paused to look round
before entering.

A churchyard. Here, then, the wretched man whose name he had now to
learn, lay underneath the ground. It was a worthy place. Walled in by
houses; overrun by grass and weeds, the growth of vegetation's death,
not life; choked up with too much burying; fat with repleted appetite. A
worthy place!

The Spirit stood among the graves, and pointed down to one. He advanced
toward it trembling. The Phantom was exactly as it had been, but he
dreaded that he saw new meaning in its solemn shape.

"Before I draw nearer to that stone to which you point," said Scrooge,
"answer me one question. Are these the shadows of the things that will
be, or are they shadows of the things that may be, only?"

Still the Ghost pointed downward to the grave by which it stood.

"Men's courses will foreshadow certain ends, to which, if persevered in,
they must lead," said Scrooge, "But if the courses be departed from, the
ends will change. Say it is thus with what you show me!"

The Spirit was immovable as ever.

Scrooge crept toward it, trembling as he went; and following the finger,
read upon the stone of the neglected grave his own name, EBENEZER
SCROOGE.

"Am _I_ that man who lay upon the bed?" he cried, upon his knees.

The finger pointed from the grave to him, and back again.

"No, Spirit! Oh, no, no!"

The finger still was there.

Holding up his hands in a last prayer to have his fate reversed, he saw
an alteration in the Phantom's hood and dress. It shrunk, collapsed, and
dwindled down into a bedpost.


STAVE FIVE.

THE END OF IT.


Yes! and the bedpost was his own. The bed was his own, and the room was
his own. Best and happiest of all, the time before him was his own, to
make amends in!

He was so fluttered and so glowing with his good intentions, that his
broken voice would scarcely answer to his call. He had been sobbing
violently in his conflict with the Spirit, and his face was wet with
tears.

"They are not torn down," cried Scrooge, folding one of his bed curtains
in his arms, "they are not torn down, rings and all. They are here--I am
here--the shadows of the things that would have been, may be dispelled.
They will be. I know they will!"

He had frisked into the sitting-room, and was now standing there:
perfectly winded.

"There's the saucepan that the gruel was in!" cried Scrooge, starting
off again, and going round the fire-place. "There's the door by which
the Ghost of Jacob Marley entered! There's the corner where the Ghost of
Christmas Present sat! There's the window where I saw the wandering
Spirits! It's all right, it's all true, it all happened. Ha, ha, ha!"

Really, for a man who had been out of practice for so many years, it was
a splendid laugh, a most illustrious laugh. The father of a long, long
line of brilliant laughs!

"I don't know what day of the month it is," said Scrooge. "I don't know
how long I have been among the Spirits. I don't know anything. I'm quite
a baby. Never mind. I don't care. I'd rather be a baby. Hallo! Whoop!
Hallo here!"

He was checked in his transports by the churches ringing out the
lustiest peals he had ever heard. Clash, clash, hammer; ding, dong,
bell. Bell, dong, ding; hammer, clang, clash! Oh, glorious, glorious!

Running to the window, he opened it and put out his head.

"What's to-day?" cried Scrooge, calling downward to a boy in Sunday
clothes, who perhaps had loitered in to look about him.

"Eh?" returned the boy, with all his might of wonder.

"What's to-day, my fine fellow?" said Scrooge.

"To-day!" replied the boy. "Why, CHRISTMAS DAY."

"It's Christmas Day!" said Scrooge to himself. "I haven't missed it. The
Spirits have done it all in one night. Hallo, my fine fellow!"

"Hallo!" returned the boy.

"Do you know the Poulterer's, in the next street but one, at the
corner?" Scrooge inquired.

"I should hope I did," replied the lad.

"An intelligent boy!" said Scrooge. "A remarkable boy! Do you know
whether they've sold the prize turkey that was hanging up there?"

"It's hanging there now," replied the boy.

"Is it?" said Scrooge. "Go and buy it."

"Walk-ER!" exclaimed the boy.

"No, no," said Scrooge, "I am in earnest. Go and buy it, and tell 'em to
bring it here, that I may give them the directions where to take it.
Come back with the man, and I'll give you a shilling."

The boy was off like a shot.

"I'll send it to Bob Cratchit's," whispered Scrooge, rubbing his hands,
and splitting with a laugh. "He shan't know who sends it. It's twice the
size of Tiny Tim."

The hand in which he wrote the address was not a steady one; but write
it he did, somehow, and went down-stairs to open the street door, ready
for the coming of the poulterer's man.

The chuckle with which he paid for the Turkey, and the chuckle with
which he recompensed the boy, were only to be exceeded by the chuckle
with which he sat down breathless in his chair again, and chuckled till
he cried.

He dressed himself "all in his best," and got out into the streets. The
people were by this time pouring forth, as he had seen them with the
Ghost of Christmas Present; and walking with his hands behind him,
Scrooge regarded every one with a delighted smile. He looked so
irresistibly pleasant, in a word, that three or four good-humored
fellows said "Good morning, sir! A Merry Christmas to you!" And Scrooge
said often afterward, that of all the blithe sounds he ever heard, those
were the blithest in his ears.

He had not gone far, when coming on toward him he beheld the portly
gentleman, who had walked into his counting-house the day before, and
said "Scrooge and Marley's, I believe?" It sent a pang across his heart
to think how this old gentleman would look upon him when they met; but
he knew what path lay straight before him, and he took it.

"My dear sir," said Scrooge, quickening his pace, and taking the old
gentleman by both his hands, "how do you do? I hope you succeeded
yesterday. It was very kind of you. A Merry Christmas to you, sir!"

"Mr. Scrooge?"

"Yes," said Scrooge. "That is my name, and I fear it may not be pleasant
to you. Allow me to ask your pardon. And will you have the
goodness"--here Scrooge whispered in his ear.

"Lord bless me!" cried the gentleman, as if his breath were taken away.
"My dear Mr. Scrooge, are you serious?"

"If you please," said Scrooge. "Not a farthing less. A great many back
payments are included in it, I assure you. Will you do me that favor?"

"My dear sir," said the other, shaking hands with him, "I don't know
what to say to such munifi--"

"Don't say anything, please," retorted Scrooge. "Come and see me. Will
you come and see me?"

"I will!" cried the old gentleman. And it was clear he meant to do it.

"Thank'ee," said Scrooge. "I am much obliged to you. I thank you fifty
times. Bless you!"

He went to church, and walked about the streets and watched the people
hurrying to and fro, and patted the children on the head, and looked
down into the kitchens of houses, and up to the windows; and found
everything could yield him pleasure. He had never dreamed that any
walk--that any thing--could give him so much happiness. In the
afternoon, he turned his steps toward his nephew's house.

He passed the door a dozen times, before he had the courage to go up and
knock. But he made a dash, and did it.

"Is your master at home, my dear?" said Scrooge to the girl. Nice girl!
Very.

"Yes, sir."

"Where is he?" said Scrooge.

"He's in the dining-room, sir, along with mistress. I'll show you
up-stairs, if you please."

"Thank'ee. He knows me," said Scrooge, with his hand already on the
dining-room lock. "I'll go in here, my dear."

He turned it gently, and sidled his face in, round the door. They were
looking at the table (which was spread out in great array); for these
young housekeepers are always nervous on such points, and like to see
that everything is right.

"Fred!" said Scrooge.

"Why, bless my soul!" cried Fred, "who's that?"

"It's I. Your Uncle Scrooge. I have come to dinner. Will you let me in,
Fred?"

Let him in! It is a mercy he didn't shake his arm off. He was at home in
five minutes. Nothing could be heartier.

But he was early at the office next morning. Oh, he was early there. If
he could only be there first, and catch Bob Cratchit coming late! That
was the thing he had set his heart upon.

And he did it; yes, he did! The clock struck nine. No Bob. A quarter
past. No Bob. He was full eighteen minutes and a half behind his time.
Scrooge sat with his door wide open, that he might see him come into the
tank.

His hat was off, before he opened the door; his comforter too. He was on
his stool in a jiffy; driving away with his pen, as if he were trying to
overtake nine o'clock.

"Hallo!" growled Scrooge, in his accustomed voice as near as he could
feign it. "What do you mean by coming here at this time of day?"

"I am very sorry, sir," said Bob. "I _am_ behind my time."

"You are!" repeated Scrooge. "Yes. I think you are. Step this way, sir,
if you please."

"It's only once a year, sir," pleaded Bob, appearing from the tank. "It
shall not be repeated. I was making rather merry yesterday, sir."

"Now, I'll tell you what, my friend," said Scrooge. "I am not going to
stand this sort of thing any longer. And therefore I am about to raise
your salary!"

"A Merry Christmas, Bob!" said Scrooge, with an earnestness that could
not be mistaken, as he clapped him on the back, "A Merrier Christmas,
Bob, my good fellow, than I have given you for many a year! I'll raise
your salary, and endeavor to assist your struggling family, and we will
discuss your affairs this very afternoon. Make up the fires, and buy
another coal scuttle before you dot another i, Bob Cratchit!"

Scrooge was better than his word. He did it all, and infinitely more;
and to Tiny Tim, who did NOT die, he was a second father. He became as
good a friend, as good a master, and as good a man, as the good old city
knew, or any other good old city, town, or borough, in the good old
world. Some people laughed to see the alteration in him, but he let them
laugh, and little heeded them; for he was wise enough to know that
nothing ever happened on this globe, for good, at which some people did
not have their fill of laughter in the outset; and knowing that such as
these would be blind anyway, he thought it quite as well that they
should wrinkle up their eyes in grins, as have the malady in less
attractive forms. His own heart laughed: and that was quite enough for
him.

He had no further intercourse with Spirits, but lived upon the Total
Abstinence Principle, ever afterward; and it was always said of him,
that he knew how to keep Christmas well, if any man alive possessed the
knowledge. May that be truly said of us, and all of us! And so, as Tiny
Tim observed, God bless Us, Every One!




THE CHRISTMAS BABE.

BY MARGARET E. SANGSTER.


     We love to think of Bethlehem,
             That little mountain town,
       To which, on earth's first Christmas Day,
             Our blessed Lord came down.
       A lowly manger for His bed,
             The cattle near in stall,
       There, cradled close in Mary's arms,
             He slept, the Lord of all.

     If we had been in Bethlehem,
             We too had hasted fain
       To see the Babe whose little face
             Knew neither care nor pain.
       Like any little child of ours,
             He came unto His own,
       Through Cross and shame before Him stretched,--
             His pathway to His Throne.

     If we had dwelt in Bethlehem,
             We would have followed fast,
       And where the Star had led our feet
             Have knelt ere dawn was past.
       Our gifts, our songs, our prayers had been
             An offering, as He lay,
       The blessed Babe of Bethlehem,
             In Mary's arms that day.

     Now breaks the latest Christmas Morn!
             Again the angels sing,
       And far and near the children throng
             Their happy hymns to bring.
       All heaven is stirred! All earth is glad!
             For down the shining way,
       The Lord who came to Bethlehem,
             Comes yet, on Christmas Day.




A WESTERN CHRISTMAS IN THE OLD DAYS.

BY MRS. W. H. CORNING.


Christmas week there was no school, but such a succession of dining
days, and visiting days, and day parties, and night parties, that Fanny,
who looked forward to the week as a season of rest, thought that the
regular routine of school duties would be less fatiguing.

Christmas at La Belle Prairie was the one jubilee of the year, something
to be talked about for six months beforehand, and to be remembered as
long after. It was a time of feasting and recreation for both master and
servant. Days before, preparations commenced in the kitchen. Various
smells issued from thence--savory smells of boiled, baked, and roasted
meats; and sweet delicious smells of warm pastry and steaming cakes.
Aunt Tibby was rolling pie-crust or stirring cake all day long, and the
chopping of sausage-meat, the pounding of spices, and the beating of
eggs were constantly heard. Everything was carried on with the greatest
secrecy. The children were all kept out of the kitchen, and when
"somefin' good" was to be transferred therefrom to Miss Car'line's
store-room, Aunt Tibby came sailing in, holding it high above the reach
of the curious little heads.

"I don't care," said Cal. "There's six pound-cakes all in a row on the
store-room shelf. I see 'em when ma opened the door; and Marthy says one
of 'em got currants in it, and there's a little shoat thar roasted
whole. O! how I wish Christmas was come."

Coming suddenly upon Maud one day, Fanny found her with her apron half
full of bran, while her fingers were busily at work upon a few pieces of
faded silk. Maud tried to hide them at first, but finding by Fanny's
question of "What is it, Maud?" that it was too late, she had looked up
with a tired, flushed face and said:

"Miss Fanny, don't you tell now! will you? I'm makin' a pin-cushion for
Aunt Phoebe, but it won't come square, all I can do. It acts awfully."

"Let me see what the trouble is," said Fanny, and sitting down, she
examined the poor cushion; which, indeed, under Maud's hands, was not
soon likely to come into shape.

"You see," said Maud, "I want to give aunty a Christmas gift, and I
thought a cushion would be so nice, 'cause her old one that she wears
pinned to her waist, you know, has burst a great hole, and the bran
keeps tumbling out. I'm going to make her a right nice one, only I wish
'twas brighter, 'cause aunty likes red, and yellow, and all them, so
bad."

Fanny searched her piece bag and brought forth bits of gay ribbon, the
sight of which threw Maud into ecstasies of delight, then giving up the
morning to the job, she cut and planned, and fitted and basted together,
getting all in order, so that Maud could do the sewing herself.

"Aunty wouldn't think half so much of it if I didn't," said the child.

Well and faithfully Maud performed her labor of love, giving up her
much-prized runs on the prairie, and resisting all the children's
entreaties to play with them, till the Christmas gift was finished. It
was no small task, for Maud most heartily hated to sew, and her fingers
were anything but nimble in the operation. "I always did despise to sew,
Miss Fanny," she said, "but I'm going to make this cushion for aunty
anyhow."

It was finished at last, and, as Maud expressed it, "was just as
beautiful as it could be." There never was a prouder, happier child. She
did not thank Fanny in words for her assistance, but that night she came
softly behind her, and putting her arms around her neck, gave her an
earnest kiss, a proceeding which called forth an exclamation of surprise
from Mrs. Catlett, for Maud was very chary of her caresses.

Christmas morning came, and long before daylight, every child upon the
place, both black and white, was up ready to "march in Christmas." There
had been mysterious preparations the night before, such as the hiding of
tin pans and glass bottles under the bed, and the faint tooting of an
old horn, heard down at the quarters, as though some one was rehearsing
a part. Fanny was also astonished by an application from little "darky
Tom" for permission to use her school-bell, the said cow-tinkler not
being remarkable for sweetness of sound.

"O, yes, Tom, you may take it; but what can you want of it?"

"Couldn't tell no ways, Miss Fanny," said Tom, with a grin. "Mebbe Miss
Fanny know in de mornin'."

Morning did indeed bring an explanation of the mystery. Assembling in
the yard, the children marshaled themselves into marching order; Maud,
of course, being captain, and taking the lead, bearing an old tin horn,
while little black Tom brought up the rear with Fanny's unfortunate
cow-bell.

In this order they commenced "marching in Christmas" to the music of the
horn, the beating of tin pans, the rattling of bits of iron and pieces
of wood, the jingling of bells, and the clapping of hands. Into the
house, and up-stairs to the very doors of the sleeping-rooms, they all
marched with their horrid din. It was received with tolerable
good-humor by all but Nanny, who, deprived of her morning nap by the
tumult, raved at the juvenile disturbers of the peace, and finally threw
her shoes at them as they stood on the stairway. These were directly
seized upon as trophies, and carried off in triumph to the quarters,
where the young performers went through with the same operations.

"Christmas gift! Christmas gift!" was the first salutation from the
servants this morning, and it was well worth while to give them some
trifling present, were it only to hear their extravagant expressions of
gratitude and delight. It was impossible to forget for a moment that it
was Christmas. One could see it in the faces of the servants, released
for a whole week from their daily tasks, and rejoicing in the prospect
of dances, and parties, and visits to friends and kindred on distant
plantations. The children, too, with their boisterous merriment and
constant talk about the holidays, seemed determined to bear it in mind,
and the great dinner--the one dinner of the year--in the preparation of
which Aunt Tibby had exercised all her skill; this, in itself, seemed to
proclaim that it was Christmas.

"Oh, Miss Fanny," said little Joy, "don't you wish Christmas lasted the
whole year round?"

The short December day was fast drawing to a close, as a party of four
rode leisurely along the road crossing La Belle Prairie. The ladies,
though scarcely recognizable in their close hoods, long blue cotton
riding skirts, and thick gloves, were none other than Miss Nancy Catlett
and our friend Fanny, while their attendants were Mr. Chester, the town
gentleman, and Massa Dave Catlett, who had come over from his new home
in Kansas, on purpose to enjoy the Christmas festivities on the prairie.
One of those night parties, of which Nanny had talked so much, was to
come off at Col. Turner's, and this was the place of their destination.
In accordance with the customs of society in these parts, they were to
remain until the next day, and, accordingly, black Viny rode a little in
the rear, mounted upon old "Poke Neck," and bearing sundry carpet-bags
and valises, containing the ladies' party-dresses.

Just at dusk, our party reached their journey's end, and dismounting one
by one from the horse-block in front of the house, they walked up the
road, and were met in the porch by Miss Bell Turner, Nanny's particular
friend. This young lady, with long curls and a very slender waist,
performed the duties of hostess in a free and easy manner, ushering the
gentlemen into the parlor, where a fire was blazing on the hearth, while
the ladies, with their attendants, were conducted up-stairs to the
dressing-room.

Here a dozen or more were engaged in the mysteries of the toilet,
braiding, twisting, and curling, while as many servants were flying
about, stumbling over each other, and creating the most dire confusion
in their efforts to supply the wants of their respective mistresses. The
beds and chairs were covered with dresses, capes, ribbons,
curling-irons, flowers, combs, and brushes, and all the paraphernalia of
the toilet, while the ladies themselves kept up a continual stream of
conversation with each other and their attendants.

Into this scene Nanny entered with great spirit. Shaking hands all
round, and introducing Fanny, she hastily threw off her bonnet and
shawl, and bidding Viny unpack the things, she set about dressing in
good earnest.

"How nice to get here so early," she said. "Now we can have a chance at
the glass, and plenty of room to move about in."

Fanny wondered what she called plenty of room, but had yet to learn the
signification of the term when applied to the dressing-room of a western
party. Thicker and faster came the arrivals, and it being necessary that
each lady should undergo a thorough transformation in dress, before
making her appearance down-stairs, the labor and confusion necessary to
bring this about can be imagined. Such hurryings to and fro, such
knockings down and pickings up, such scolding and laughing, in short
such a Babel of sounds as filled the room for an hour or two, Fanny had
never heard before. Completing her own toilet as soon as possible, she
seated herself upon one of the beds, and watched the proceedings with
great interest.

"You Suke, bring me some more pins, directly." "O please, Miss Ellen,
mind my wreath!" "Jule, how much longer are you goin' to keep the
wash-bowl?" "Dar now, Miss Eveline done get her coat all wet." "Did you
know Tom Walton was here? I see him in the passage." "Miss Belle, that's
_my_ starch-bag." "There, now! don't them slippers fit beautiful?" "Why
don't that girl come back?" "O, Liza, just fasten up my dress, that's a
dear girl!" "Come, girls, do hurry, we shan't be dressed to-night."

How it was all brought about, Fanny could not tell, but at last the
ladies were dressed, the last sash pinned, and the last curl adjusted.
Dresses of thin material, cut low in the neck, with short sleeves,
seemed to be the order of the night, which with wreaths, and bunches of
artificial flowers in the hair, gave the ladies a handsome appearance.
With Miss Belle at the head, they all descended to the parlor, and found
the gentlemen strolling about, employing themselves as they could, till
the night's amusements commenced; and, indeed, both ladies and gentlemen
manifested such eagerness to adjourn to the play-room, that the signal
was soon given, and they proceeded forthwith to a log building in the
yard, formerly used as a school-room.

Games soon commenced, and were carried on with great vigor, the young
people making up in activity what was lacking in gracefulness of motion.
Game after game was made out, the ladies vying with each other to see
who should laugh the most, while those who were left chatted gayly
together in groups, or tried their powers of fascination upon some
long-limbed specimen of humanity.

"What calls the gentlemen up-stairs so frequently?" inquired Fanny,
innocently, as groups of two and three disappeared up the steps leading
to the room above.

"You are not aware, then, what a formidable rival the ladies have up in
the loft?" said Mr. Chester, gravely, though there was a comical
expression about the corners of his mouth.

"No, indeed."

"Well, I only hope you may not witness the overpowering influence
sometimes exerted by this same rival," said Mr. Chester; "but honestly,
Miss Hunter, there is serious danger that some of these light-footed
young gentlemen may, ere long, be obliged to relinquish their places in
our party, all through the attractions presented to them up yonder."

"I don't in the least know what you mean."

"In plain words, then, they are talking about horses up there; men are
crazy over horses you know."

"Are you in earnest, Mr. Chester?"

"Certainly I am. It would not answer, I suppose, for ladies to intrude
upon their modest retirement, or I could convince you in a moment."

"How can you joke about it, Mr. Chester? I think it is perfectly
scandalous."

"Well, it is bad enough," said her companion, more gravely. "One living
at the west becomes accustomed to such things."

"_I_ never will," said Fanny. "If I had known these Christmas parties
countenanced such impoliteness, I would have stayed at home."

"A set supper," Nanny had several times expressed a hope that Mrs.
Turner would provide, and she was not disappointed. The long table was
bountifully spread with the substantials of this life, and though not in
the style of an entertainment in Fifth Avenue, it was admirably suited
to the guests who partook of it. A roasted "shoat" graced each end of
the board, a side of bacon the centre, while salted beef, cut in thin
slices, with pickles and cheese, constituted the side-dishes. Hot
coffee, corn bread and biscuit were passed to each guest, and a piece of
pound-cake and a little preserved fruit for dessert.

There was plenty of laughter and hearty joking at the table, and the
flushed faces and increased volubility of the gentlemen gave too certain
evidence of the truth of Mr. Chester's assertions.

"The langest day maun hae an end," says the old Scotch proverb, audit
was with a sigh of relief that Fanny at last saw Uncle Jake lay down the
tortured fiddle, and the guests with lingering steps and wishful eyes
retire to seek the few hours of repose that were left of the night.
"Confusion worse confounded" reigned for a time in the apartment
appropriated to the ladies' use, and the numerous couches spread upon
the floor increased the difficulty of navigation. At last, when quiet
seemed restored, and Fanny was sinking into a peaceful sleep, she was
aroused by her neighbors in an adjoining bed, three young ladies who
declared that they were "all but starved, and must have something to eat
before they could go to sleep." One of the black women was despatched to
the store-room for some slices of cold bacon, and sitting up in bed,
with the candle before them, they made a hearty repast.

"Of course, you can't eat half as much as you want at table," said one
of the young ladies, apologetically; "one always wants to appear
delicate-like before the gentlemen."

"What in goodness' name, Nan, made breakfast so late?" said Dave the
next morning, or rather noon, as they were returning home; "I thought
one while we wasn't goin' to get any." "Why, you see, they hadn't any
wheat flour in the house for the biscuit," said Nanny, "and they had to
send three miles over the prairie to Mr. John Turner's to borrow some."

"Twenty people invited to stay over night, and no flour in the house?"
said Fanny, in amazement.

"It rather shocks your Yankee ideas of looking out ahead, Miss Hunter,"
said Mr. Chester, laughing. "We are used to such things out this way."

"Oh! Miss Fanny, people can't remember everything, you know," said
Nanny; "Belle says they never thought a word about it till this
morning."




JOE'S SEARCH FOR SANTA CLAUS.

BY IRVING BACHELLER


     A story, my child? Well, there's none that I know
     As good as the story about little Joe.
     He lived with his mother, just under the eaves
     Of a tenement high, where the telegraph weaves
     Its highway of wire, that everywhere goes,
     And makes the night musical when the wind blows.
     Their home had no father--the two were bereft
     Of all but their appetites--those never left!
     Joe's grew with his thought; a day never passed
     He spent not in hunger to make the food last;
     And days when his mother silently went
     And stood by the windows--Joe knew what it meant.
     They'd nothing for supper! The words were so sad
     That somehow they drowned all the hunger he had.
     And surely God's miracles never have ceased--
     Joe's hunger grew less when his sorrows increased.
     When the coal ran out in winter's worst storm,
     The fire burnt the harder that kept their hearts warm.
     Their windows revealed many wonderful sights,
     Long acres of roofing and high-flying kites;
     At sunset, the great vault of heaven aglow,
     The lining of gold on the clouds hanging low,
     The cross on the top of St. Mary's high tower
     Ablaze with the light of that magical hour;
     And still, as the arrows of light slanted higher,
     The last thing in sight was the great cross of fire.
     Each day, as it vanished, the history old
     Of Christ's crucifixion was reverently told;
     To Him the boy learned to confide all his woes,
     But oftenest prayed for a new suit of clothes,
     Since those that he wore didn't fit him at all--
     The coat was too large and the trousers too small,
     And Joe looked so queer, from his head to his feet,
     It grieved his proud soul to be seen in the street.
     And sometimes he cherished a secret desire
     To own a hand-sled, or to build a bonfire;
     But reached one conclusion by various routes--
     He could have better fun with a new pair of boots.
     He thought how the old pair, when shiny and whole.
     Had squeaked in a way that delighted his soul,
     And remembrance grew sad as he strutted around
     And tried hard, but vainly, to waken that sound.
     The day before Christmas brought trouble for Joe,
     A thousand times worse. 'Twas a terrible blow
     To hear that old Santa Claus, god of his dreams.
     Would not come that year with his fleet-footed teams.
     He'd seen them. Why, once, of a night's witching hour
     He saw them jump over the cross on the tower
     And scamper away o'er the snow-covered roofs,
     His heart beating time to the sound of their hoofs.
     Not coming this year? Santa Claus must be dead,
     He thought, as with sad tears he crept into bed.
     And, as he lay thinking, the long strings of wire
     Sang low in the wind like a deep-sounding lyre,
     And Joe caught the notes of this solemn refrain--
     "He'll not come again! no, he'll not come again!"
     And oh! how the depths of his spirit were stirred
     By thoughts that were born of the music he heard!
     How cold were the winds, and they sang in their strife,
     Of storms yet to come in the winters of life.
     They mocked him, but mark how the faith of the child
     Stood firm as a fortress, its hope undefiled;
     For still the boy thought that, if Santa Claus knew
     How great were their needs and their comforts how few,
     He would come; and at length, when the first rays of light
     Had fathomed the infinite depths of the night,
     And brightened the windows, Joe cautiously crept
     Out of bed: and he dressed while his mother still slept,
     And down the long stairways on tiptoe he ran;
     Then out in the snow, with the will of a man,
     He went, looking hither and thither, because,
     Poor boy! he was trying to find Santa Claus.
     He hurried along through the snow-burdened street
     As if the good angels were guiding his feet;
     And as the sun rose in the heavens apace,
     A radiance fell on his uplifted face
     That came from the cross gleaming far overhead--
     A symbol of hope for the living and dead.
     A moment he looked at the great house of prayer,
     Then slyly peeked in to see what was there;
     And entering softly he wandered at will
     Through pathways of velvet, deserted and still,
     And saw the light grow on a wonderful scene
     Of ivy-twined columns and arches of green,
     And back of the rail, where the clergyman knelt,
     He sat on the cushions to see how they felt.
     How soft was that velvet he stroked with his hand!
     But when he lay down, oh, the feeling was grand!
     And while he was musing the walls seemed to sway,
     And slowly the windows went moving away.
     What, ho! there he comes! with his big pack and all,
     Down the sunbeams that slope from the high-windowed wall,
     And Joe tried to speak, but could not, if he died,
     When Santa Claus came and sat down by his side.
     "A tenement boy! humph! he probably swears."
     (Joe trembled, and tried hard to think of his prayers.)
     He lifted Joe's eyelids, he patted his brow,
     And said. "He is not a bad boy, anyhow."
     But hark! there is music; a deep-swelling sound
     Is sweeping on high as if heavenward bound.
     And suddenly waking, Joe saw kneeling there
     The rector, long-robed, who was reading a prayer.
     "Provide for the fatherless children," said he
     "The widowed, the helpless, the bond and the free."
     The rector stops praying--his face wears a frown;
     A ragged young gamin is pulling his gown.
     "I knowed you would come," said the boy, half in fright--
     "I knowed you would come--I was watchin' all night.
     Say! what are ye goin' t'give mother an' me?
     Le'me see what 'tis, Santa Claus--please le'me see!"
     The rector looked down into Joe's honest face,
     And a great wave of feeling swept over the place;
     And tenderly laying his hand on Joe's head,
     He turned to the people and solemnly said:
     "We pray that the poor may be sheltered and fed,
     And we leave it to Heaven to furnish the bread.
     Ye know, while He feedeth the fowls in the air.
     The children of mankind He leaves to man's care;"
     And kissing Joe's face the preacher said then;
     "Of such is the kingdom of Heaven. Amen!"
     That day Santa Claus came to many a door
     He'd forgotten to call at the evening before.
     Was little Joe lucky? Well, now, you are right.
     And the wires sang merrily all the next night.




ANGELA'S CHRISTMAS.

BY JULIA SCHAYER.


"Then it is 'yes,' father dear?" said Angela, looking across the
breakfast table with a smile. It was her mother's smile, and the girl
had filled her mother's vacant chair for more than a year.

The eyes of the father and daughter met, and Angela knew, before a word
was said, that she had conquered.

"I hate to see you at your age, beginning to worry over these things,"
Ephraim Frazier said, regretfully. "Let the _old_ women take care of the
charities, dear. You keep on dancing in the sunshine a while longer,
daughter."

Angela's smile grew graver, but not less sweet.

"I am twenty, dear," she said. "Too old to dance _all_ the time, and I
cannot help _thinking_, you know. And--it's no use, papa dear! I _must_
do something! It _is_ 'yes,' isn't it?"

"You are sure you won't mind being criticised and ridiculed?"

"Quite sure!" answered Angela.

"And sure you won't take your failures and disappointments to heart too
deeply?"

"Quite sure I can bear them bravely," answered the girl. "If only one,
_just one_, of those poor creatures may be helped, and lifted up, and
brought out of darkness, it will be worth trying for!"

"And what does Robert Johns say about it?"

A glow kindled in Angela's face.

"Robert is in perfect sympathy with me," she said softly. Then again,
this time having risen and gone around to his side, to speak with her
face against the old banker's smoothly shaven cheek, "It _is_ 'yes,'
isn't it, daddy dear?"

"Well, yes! Only you must go slow, dear. You are not over strong, you
know."

And soon it came to pass that on a vacant lot, hitherto given over to
refuse heaps, haunted by stray cats, ragpickers, and vagrant children,
in one of the vilest quarters of the metropolis, there sprang up, with
magic swiftness, a commodious frame building, surrounded by smooth green
sod, known in the lower circles as the Locust Street Home; in upper
circles, laughingly denominated "Angela's Experiment."

Angela did not mind. It was mostly goodnatured laughter, and many of the
laughers ended by lending willing hands and hearts to the cause. It was
wonderful how the news spread through the city's purlieus that here was
a sanctuary into which cold, hunger, and fatigue dared not intrude; a
place which the lowest might enter and be made welcome, and go
unquestioned, his personal rights as carefully respected as though he
were one of the Four Hundred.

That was Angela's theory. No man, woman, or child should be _compelled_
to anything. First make their bodies comfortable, then surround them
with ennobling influences and examples, entertain them, arouse them,
stimulate them, hold out the helping hand, _and leave the rest to God_.
"They shall not even be _compelled_ to be clean!" she said, laughing.
"If the beautiful clean bathrooms and clean clothing do not tempt them
to cleanliness, then so be it! I will have no rules; only influences.
You will see!"

And people did see, and wondered.

Sometimes, on warm, pleasant evenings, the spacious, cheerful hall, with
its tables and chairs, would be almost empty; but on nights like that on
which this story opens, a dark, cold December night, the seats were apt
to be well filled, mostly with slatternly, hard-featured women, and
dull-faced children, who sat staring stolidly about, while the music and
speaking went on; half stupefied by the warmth and tranquillity so
foreign to their lives.

Outside, a dismal sleet was falling, but from the open door of the
vestibule a great sheet of light fell upon the wet pavement, and above
it glowed a transparency bearing the words:

"A Merry Christmas to all! Come in!"

It was while the singing was going on, led by a high, sweet girl's
voice, that a human figure came hobbling out from a side street, and
stopped short at the very edge of the lighted space.

A woman by her dress, an old, old woman, with a seamed, blotched face;
an ugly, human wreck, all torn and battered and discolored by the storms
of life. Such was old Marg--"Luny Marg," as she was called in the haunts
that knew her best. Her history? She had forgotten it herself, very
likely, and there was no one to know or care--no one in the wide world
to care if she should at any moment be trampled to death, or slip from
the dock into the black river. The garret which lodged her would find
another tenant; the children of the gutters another target for their
missiles. Not that she was worse than others--only that she was old and
ugly and sharp of tongue, and the world--even _her_ world--has no use
for such as she.

For some time this forlorn creature continued to hover on the edge of
the lighted space. The sleet had become snow, and already a thin white
film covered the pavement, promising "a white Christmas," and the cold
increased from moment to moment.

The woman drew her filthy shawl closer; her jaws chattered, yet she
seemed unable to tear herself from the spot. Her eyes, alert under
their gray brows, as a rat's, were fixed now upon the open door, now
upon the transparency, yet she made no motion toward the proffered
shelter. Two men, hirsute and ragged, stopped near her and, after a
moments consultation, slunk across the square of light and disappeared
in the building. As the door was opened, there came a fuller burst of
song, and a rush of warm air, fragrant with the aroma of coffee and
oysters.

The old woman's body quivered with desire; food, warmth, rest--all that
her miserable frame demanded--were there within easy reach, for the mere
asking; nay for the mere taking; yet still the devils of stubbornness
and spite would not let go their hold upon her. But finally, as a bitter
blast swept the snow stingingly against her face, she uttered a hoarse
snarl, and glancing about to see that no jeering eye was upon her, the
poor creature crept across the pavement, clambered up the stone steps,
and, pushing open the door, slipped into the nearest vacant seat.

The chairs and benches were unusually well filled. Numbers of women and
children were in the foreground. A few men were also present, sitting
with their bodies hanging forward, their hats tightly clutched between
their knees, their eyes fixed on the floor. The women and children, on
the contrary, followed every movement of the young women on the platform
with furtive eagerness.

The simplicity of attire which Angela and her friends had assumed did
not deceive even the tiniest gutter-child present--these were "ladies,"
and one and all accorded them the same tribute of genuine, if reluctant,
admiration.

Old Marg, after the embarrassment of the first moment, took everything
in with one hawk-like glance--the Christmas greens upon the clean, white
walls, the curtained space in the rear which hid some pleasant mystery,
the men and women on the platform.

At the organ sat a young girl, leaning upon the now silent keys, her
face toward the young man who was speaking. Old Marg could not take her
eyes from this face--white, serious, sweet, set in a halo of pale golden
hair. The sight of it aroused strange feelings in the bosom of the old
outcast. Fascinated, tortured, bewildered, she sat and gazed. It was
long since she had thought of her youth. This girl reminded her of that
forgotten time. Like a violet flung upon a refuse-heap, the thought of
her own innocent girlhood lay for an instant upon the foul mass of
memories accumulated by sixty-miserable years. "_I_ was light-haired,
too!" ran old Marg's thoughts. "Light-haired, an' light-complected, like
her!"

The perfume of that thought breathed across her soul, and was gone.
Still she gazed from under her shaggy brows, and, without meaning to
listen, found herself hearing what the speaker was saying. He was
telling without rhetoric or cant the story of Christ, and with
simplicity and tact presenting the lesson of His life.

"This joy of giving, of sacrificing for others," the young man was
saying in his earnest, musical voice, "so far beyond the joy of
receiving, is within the reach of every human being. Think of that! The
poorest man or woman or child who breathes on earth to-night may know
this joy, may give some pleasure, some help, some comfort, to some
fellow-creature. Whether it be a human creature or a dumb beast, matters
not. It is all one in God's sight, being an act of love and kindness and
sacrifice."

Old Marg looked down upon her squalid rags; her rough features writhed
with a scornful smile. "That's a lie!" she muttered. "What could the
likes of _me_ do for anybody, I'd like to know!"

Still she listened; but at last, as the warmth stole through her sodden
garments, and into her chilled veins, and the peace of the place
penetrated the turbulent recesses of her soul, the man's voice became
like a voice heard in a dream, and the old outcast slept.


A confused sound greeted her awakening. Some one was playing the organ
jubilantly; people were moving about--girls with trays loaded with
steaming dishes; children were talking and laughing excitedly. The
curtain had been drawn, and a great Christmas-tree almost blinded her
with its splendor. She stared about in bewilderment. She looked at the
tree, at the people, at her own foul rags. A fierce revulsion of feeling
swept over her. Rage, shame, a desire to get out of sight, to be
swallowed up in the darkness and misery which were her proper element,
seized and mastered her. She staggered to her feet. A young girl
approached her with a tray of tempting food. The sight and smell of it
goaded the starved creature to madness. She could have fallen upon it
like a wolf, but instead she pushed the girl roughly aside and fumbled
dizzily at the door-knob.

A hand was laid upon her arm. The girl with the sweet, white face was
looking at her with a friendly smile.

"Won't you stay and have something warm to eat before going into the
cold?" the girl asked gently.

Old Marg shook the hand from her arm.

"No!" she snarled. "I don't want nothin'! Let me go!"

With a patient smile Angela opened the door.

"I am sorry you will not stay," she said softly. "It would give me great
pleasure. There is a gift for you on the tree, too. It is Christmas Eve,
you know!"

A hoarse, choking sound came from the woman's lips. She pushed by into
the vestibule. Angela followed.

"If you should feel differently to-morrow," she said, in her kind,
gentle voice, "come here again, about eleven o'clock. I shall be here."
Without waiting for a reply, she re-entered the hall. A young man, the
same who had been speaking, met her at the door.

"Angela!" he exclaimed. "You should not be out there in the cold!" She
smiled absently. "Did you see her, Robert?"

"That terrible old woman? Yes, I saw her. A hopeless case, I fear."

Angela's eyes kept their absent look.

"It was awful to see her go away like that, into the cold and snow,
hungry and half-clad!" she said.

The young man leaned nearer. "Angela," he whispered. "You must not let
these things sink into your heart as you do, or you cannot bear the work
you have undertaken. As for that old creature, it is terrible to think
of her, but she seemed to me beyond our reach."

"But not beyond God's reach _through us_!" said Angela.


Meantime old Marg was facing the storm with rage and pain in her face
and in her heart. The streets were deserted, and lighted only by such
beams as found their way through the dirty windows of shops and saloons.
From these last came sounds of revelry and contention, and at one or
another the poor creature paused, listening without fear to the familiar
hubbub. Should she go in? Some one might give her a drink, to ease for a
time the terrible gnawing at her breast. Might? Yes; but more likely she
would be thrust out with jeers and curses, and, for some reason, old
Marg was in no mood to use the caustic wit and ready tongue that were
her only weapons. So she staggered on until the swarming tenement was
reached, stumbled up the five flights of unillumined stairs, and almost
fell headlong into the dismal garret which she called her home.

Feeling about in the darkness, she found a match and lit a bit of candle
which stopped the neck of an empty bottle. It burned uncertainly as if
reluctant to disclose the scene upon which its light fell. A
smoke-stained, sloping ceiling, a blackened floor, a shapeless mattress
heaped with rags, a deal box, a rusty stove resting upon two bricks,
supporting in its turn an ancient frying-pan, a chipped saucer, and a
battered tin can from which, when the scavenger business was good, old
Marg served afternoon tea--such were her home and all her personal
belongings.

There was no fire, nor any means of producing one, but upon the box was
spread a piece of paper containing a slice of bread and a soup-bone,
whereto clung some fragments of meat--the gift of a neighbor hardly less
wretched than herself.

The old woman's eyes glittered at the sight, and, seizing the food, she
sank weakly upon the box and began gnawing at it; but her toothless
jaws, stiff with cold, made no impression upon the tough meat and hard
crust, and letting them drop to the floor, the poor creature fell to
rocking to and fro, whimpering tearlessly, like a suffering dog.
Strangely enough, within the withered bosom of this most wretched
creature there had welled up, from some hidden source of womanly
feeling, a passionate self-pity, a no less passionate self-loathing.
This was what a moment's contact with all that she had so long
abjured--purity, order, gentleness--had brought to pass.

That fair young girl-tall, pale, sweet as an Easter lily--stood before
her like an incarnate memory, pointing toward the past, the far-distant
past, when she, too, was young, and pretty, and innocent, and gay--too
pretty and too gay for a poor working girl! That was where the trouble
began.

"I was light haired, too," moaned old Marg, twisting her withered
fingers restlessly. "Light-haired, and light-complected! A pretty girl,
an' a good girl, too! Not like _her_. No! How could I be? Little the
likes o' her knows what the likes o' me has to face! Lord!"

The bit of candle guttered and went out. The cold increased. It had
ceased snowing, and a keen wind had arisen, tearing the clouds into
shreds through which the stars gleamed. And presently the moon climbed
up behind the belfry of the old church across the square, and sent one
broad white ray through the dingy window and across the floor. All at
once the great bell began to strike the midnight hour, its mingled
vibrations filling the garret with tumultuous sounds. The vision of the
fair girl faded, and old Marg was herself again, a hard, bitter,
rebellious old woman, with a burning care where her heart had been, and
only one thought, one desire, left in her desperate mind--the thought
and the desire of death.

In young and passionate days she had often thought of seeking that way
out of life's agonies, but at its worst there is always some sweetness
left in the cup--when one is young! It was not so now. The dregs only
had been hers for many a year, and she had enough. Death--yes, that was
best.

Her eyes glittered as she cast a look about the silent room. Bare, even
of the means to this end! Ah, the window!

With an inarticulate cry the woman arose and hobbled along the shining
moon-ray to the window, and threw open the sash. Awed by the stern
beauty of the heavens, the splendor of the moon tangled in the lace-like
carvings of the belfry as in a net, she leaned some moments against the
sill, looking out and down. Far below lay the deserted square, its white
bosom traced with the sharp shadow of the tower. With a keen eye old
Marg measured the distance, a sheer descent of fifty feet. Nothing to
break the fall--nothing!

One movement, a swift fall, and that white surface would be broken by a
black shapeless heap. A policeman would find it on his next round, or
some drunken reveler would stumble over it, or the good people on their
way to early mass--ah! The seamed countenance lit up suddenly with a
malignant joy.

Why not wait until they began to pass--those pious, respectable people
in their comfortable furs and wools--and cast herself into their midst,
a ghastly Christmas offering from Poverty to Riches, from Sin to Virtue?
This suggestion commended itself highly to her sense of humor. With a
hoarse chuckle she was about to close the window when a portion of the
shadow that lay alongside the chimney showed signs of life, and, rising
on four long and skinny legs, became a cat--a lean, black cat, which
crept meekly toward the window, its phosphorescent eyes gleaming, its
lank jaws parted in a vain effort to mew. Startled, old Marg drew back
for an instant; then, glancing from the animal to the pavement below, a
brutal cunning, a malicious pleasure, lit up the witch-like features.
Reaching out one skinny arm, she called coaxingly: "Puss! Puss!"

The cat dragged herself up to the outstretched arm, rubbing her lank
body caressingly against it.

The cruel, cunning old face softened suddenly. "Lord!" muttered old
Marg, "if she ain't a-tryin' to _purr_! Wall, that beats me!"

The poor beast continued its piteous appeal for aid, arching its
starved frame, waving its tail, fawning unsuspectingly against the arm
that had threatened.

With an impulse new to her misery-hardened heart, old Marg drew the
animal in and closed the window. Far from resisting, the cat nestled
against her with every sign of pleasure.

"She's been somebody's pet," said the old woman, placing her on the
floor. "She ain't always been like this."

The divine emotion of pity, so new to this forlorn creature, grew and
swelled in her bosom. The man at the hall had _not_ lied, after all.
Here was another of God's creatures as miserable as herself--nay, more
so, for she had a roof to shelter her! And she could share it with this
homeless one.

"Poor puss!" muttered old Marg, stroking the rough fur. "You're
starvin', too, ain't ye? an' I ain't got nothin' to give ye, not a bite
or a sup. Ah!"

Her eyes had fallen upon the discarded food. Eagerly she seized it and
placed it before the cat; the starving creature gnawed greedily at the
bone an instant, then looked up with a hopeless mew.

The old woman felt a keener pang of pity.

"Poor beast!" she said, with a bitter smile. "Ye can't eat 'em, can ye?
No more could I! We're in the same box, puss! Old, an' toothless, an'
nobody belongin' to us. We'll have to starve together, I guess. An' it's
Christmas day! Did ye know that, puss? Christmas day! Lord! Lord!"

The cat rubbed against her skirts, her eyes fixed upon her benefactor's.
"Seems to understand every word I say!" old Marg muttered. "If only I
had a drop o' milk for her now!"

Hobbling to the stove, she examined the battered tin can, letting the
moonlight shine into its rusty depths. A little water or tea remained in
it, and with this she moistened some of the bread and placed it before
the cat, which devoured it now eagerly. Then she took the animal in her
arms and laid herself down on the mattress, drawing the ragged covers
over them. The cat nestled against her side; the warmth of the two poor
bodies mingled, and both slept.

The moon-ray crept along and spread itself over the heap of rags, the
knotted fingers resting on the cat's rough fur, the seamed old face; it
passed away, and morning dawned, with a peal of bells and the sound of
footsteps on the pavement below, and still the two slept on.


Angela stood near the door, receiving her Christmas guests. They came
straggling in, in twos and threes, some boldly and impudently, some
shame-faced and shy, some eager, some indifferent, but all
poverty-pinched. Each one was pleasantly welcomed, and passed on to the
feast. Angela watched and waited, and at last the door opened slowly to
admit old Marg, who stopped short on the threshold, with a look at once
stubborn, appealing, suspicious, ashamed. Like a wild animal on the
alert for the faintest sign of repulsion or danger, she stood there, but
Angela only smiled, proffering her white, soft hand, destitute of
jewels, but the hand of a lady.

"A Merry Christmas!" she said brightly.

"I was ugly to ye last night," said old Marg huskily, ignoring the
beautiful hand she dared not touch.

"Never mind!" Angela answered sweetly. "You were tired."

"I am a bad old woman!" said old Marg, mistrustfully.

"Never mind that, either!" said Angela. "Let me be your friend. If you
will, you shall never be cold or hungry again."

A profound wonder came into the old face--then it began to writhe, and
from each eye oozed scant tears, seeking a channel amid the seams and
wrinkles of the sunken cheeks.

"You will let me be your friend," urged Angela.

Still old Marg wept silently, the scant tears of age.

"You shall have a pleasant home and----"

A swift, suspicious glance darted from the wet eyes.

"Not a 'sylum, miss, please!" said the old woman.

"No," said Angela quietly. "Not an asylum, A home--a bright, clean,
comfortable home----"

"I can work, miss!" put in old Marg, doubling her knotted hands to show
their strength. "I can wash, an' scrub----"

"Yes," said Angela, "you may work all you are able, helping to keep
things clean and comfortable."

Still old Marg looked doubtful. Wiping her cheeks with a corner of the
shawl, she half turned toward the door.

"Have you a family, or any one belonging to you?" asked Angela, thinking
to have reached the root of the difficulty.

"Yes," said the old woman stoutly. "I have a cat. Where I go, she must
go, too!"

Angela patted the grimy hand, with a laugh which was good to hear.

"I understand you perfectly," she said. "I have a cat of my own. You and
_your_ cat shall not be separated."


A half-hour later entered the young man Robert. Angela pointed silently
to old Marg, sitting in a warm corner, contentedly munching her
Christmas dinner. "What have you done to her?" he asked. "She looks more
human already."

Angela laughed again, that same laugh which goes to one's heart so. "I
have adopted her--and her cat!" she answered. "That's all!"




THE FIRST PURITAN CHRISTMAS TREE.

(ANONYMOUS.)


Mrs. Olcott called her boys, and bade them go to the pine woods and get
the finest, handsomest young hemlock tree that they could find.

"Get one that is straight and tall, with well-boughed branches on it,
and put it where you can draw it under the wood-shed after dark," she
added.

The boys went to Pine Hill, and there they picked out the finest young
tree on all the hill, and said, "We will take this one." So, with their
hatchets they hewed it down and brought it safely home the next night
when all was dark. And when Roger was quietly sleeping in the adjoining
room, they dragged the tree into the kitchen. It was too tall, so they
took it out again and cut it off two or three feet at the base. Then
they propped it up, and the curtains being down over the windows, and
blankets being fastened over the curtains to prevent any one looking in,
and the door being doubly barred to prevent any one coming in, they all
went to bed.

Very early the next morning, while the stars shone on the snow-covered
hills--the same stars that shone sixteen hundred years before on the
hills when Christ was born in Bethlehem--the little Puritan mother in
New England arose very softly. She went out and lit the kitchen fire
anew from the ash-covered embers. She fastened upon the twigs of the
tree the gifts she had bought in Boston for her boys and girl. Then she
took as many as twenty pieces of candle and fixed them upon the
branches. After that she softly called Rupert, Robert and Lucy, and told
them to get up and come into the kitchen.

Hurrying back, she began, with a bit of a burning stick, to light the
candles. Just as the last one was set aflame, in trooped the three
children.

Before they had time to say a word, they were silenced by their mother's
warning.

"I wish to fetch Roger in and wake him up before it," she said. "Keep
still until I come back!"

The little lad, fast asleep, was lifted in a blanket and gently carried
by his mother into the beautiful presence.

"See! Roger, my boy, see!" she said, arousing him. "It is Christmas
morning now! In England they only have Christmas-boughs, but here in New
England we have a whole Christmas-tree."

"O mother!" he cried. "O Lucy! Is it really, really true, and no dream
at all? Yes, I see! I see! O mother, it is so beautiful! Were all the
trees on all the hills lighted up that way when Christ was born? And,
mother," he added, clapping his little hands with joy at the thought,
"why, yes, the stars did sing when Christ was born! They must be glad,
then, and keep Christmas, too, in heaven. I know they must, and there
will be good times there."

"Yes," said his mother; "there will be good times there, Roger."

"Then," said the boy, "I sha'n't mind going, now that I've seen the
Christmas-bough. I--What is that, mother?"

What was it that they heard? The little Olcott home had never before
seemed to tremble so. There were taps at the window, there were knocks
at the door--and it was as yet scarcely the break of day! There were
voices also, shouting something to somebody.

"Shall I put out the candles, mother?" whispered Robert.

"What will they do to us for having the tree? I wish we hadn't it,"
regretted Rupert; while Lucy clung to her mother's gown and shrieked
with all her strength, "It's Indians!"

Pale and white and still, ready to meet her fate, stood Mrs. Olcott,
until, out of the knocking and the tapping at her door, her heart caught
a sound. It was a voice calling, "Rachel! Rachel! Rachel!"

"Unbar the door!" she cried back to her boys; "it's your father
calling!" Down came the blankets; up went the curtain; open flew the
door, and in walked Captain Olcott, followed by every man and woman in
Plymouth who had heard at break of day the glorious news that the
expected ship had arrived at Boston, and with it the long lost Captain
Olcott. For an instant nothing was thought of except the joyous
welcoming of the Captain in his new home.

"What's this? What is it? What does this mean?" was asked again and
again, when the first excitement was passed, as the tall young pine
stood aloft, its candles ablaze, its gifts still hanging.

"It's welcome home to father!" said Lucy, her only thought to screen her
mother.

"No, child, no!" sternly spoke Mrs. Olcott. "Tell the truth!"

"It's--a--Christmas-tree!" faltered poor Lucy.

One and another and another, Pilgrims and Puritans all, drew near with
faces stern and forbidding, and gazed and gazed, until one and another
and yet another softened slowly into a smile as little Roger's piping
voice sung out:

"She made it for me, mother did. But you may have it now, and all the
pretty things that are on it, too, because you've brought my father back
again; if mother will let you," he added.

Neither Pilgrim nor Puritan frowned at the gift. One man, the sternest
there, broke off a little twig and said:

"I'll take it for the sake of the good old times at home."




THE FIRST CHRISTMAS IN NEW ENGLAND.

BY HEZEKIAH BUTTERWORTH.


     They thought they had come to their port that day,
       But not yet was their journey done;
     And they drifted away from Provincetown Bay
       In the fireless light of the sun.
     With rain and sleet were the tall masts iced,
       And gloomy and chill was the air,
     But they looked from the crystal sails to Christ,
       And they came to a harbor fair.
               The white hills silent lay,--
           For there were no ancient bells to ring,
           No priests to chant, no choirs to sing,
           No chapel of baron, or lord, or king,
               That gray, cold winter day.

     The snow came down on the vacant seas,
       And white on the lone rocks lay,--
     But rang the axe 'mong the evergreen trees
       And followed the Sabbath day.
     Then rose the sun in a crimson haze,
       And the workmen said at dawn:
     "Shall our axes swing on this day of days,
       When the Lord of Life was born?"
               The white hills silent lay,--
           For there were no ancient bells to ring,
           No priests to chant, no choirs to sing,
           No chapel of baron, or lord, or king,
               That gray, cold Christmas Day.

       "The old town's bells we seem to hear:
       They are ringing sweet on the Dee;
     They are ringing sweet on the Harlem Meer,
       And sweet on the Zuyder Zee.
     The pines are frosted with snow and sleet.
       Shall we our axes wield
     When the chimes at Lincoln are ringing sweet
       And the bells of Austerfield?"
               The air was cold and gray,--
           And there were no ancient bells to ring,
           No priests to chant, no choirs to sing,
           No chapel of baron, or lord, or king,
               That gray, cold Christmas Day.

     Then the master said, "Your axes wield,
       Remember ye Malabarre Bay;
     And the covenant there with the Lord ye sealed;
       Let your axes ring to-day.
     You may talk of the old town's bells to-night,
       When your work for the Lord is done,
     And your boats return, and the shallop's light
       Shall follow the light of the sun.
               The sky is cold and gray,--
           And here are no ancient bells to ring,
           No priests to chant, no choirs to sing,
           No chapel of baron, or lord, or king.
               This gray, cold Christmas Day.

     "If Christ was born on Christmas Day,
       And the day by Him is blest,
     Then low at His feet the evergreens lay
       And cradle His church in the West.
     Immanuel waits at the temple gates
       Of the nation to-day ye found,
     And the Lord delights in no formal rites;
       To-day let your axes sound!"
               The sky was cold and gray,--
           And there were no ancient bells to ring,
           No priests to chant, no choirs to sing,
           No chapel of baron, or lord, or king,
               That gray, cold Christmas Day.

     Their axes rang through the evergreen trees
       Like the bells on the Thames and Tay;
     And they cheerily sang by the windy seas,
       And they thought of Malabarre Bay.
     On the lonely heights of Burial Hill
       The old Precisioners sleep;
     But did ever men with a nobler will
       A holier Christmas keep,
               When the sky was cold and gray,--
           And there were no ancient bells to ring,
           No priests to chant, no choirs to sing,
           No chapel of baron, or lord, or king,
               That gray, cold Christmas Day?




THE CHIMES.

BY CHARLES DICKENS.


FIRST QUARTER.

There are not many people--and as it is desirable that a story-teller
and a story-reader should establish a mutual understanding as soon as
possible, I beg it to be noticed that I confine this observation neither
to young people nor to little people, but extend it to all conditions of
people: little and big, young and old: yet growing up, or already
growing down again--there are not, I say, many people who would care to
sleep in a church. I don't mean at sermon time in warm weather (when the
thing has actually been done, once or twice), but in the night, and
alone. A great multitude of persons will be violently astonished, I
know, by this position, in the broad bold Day. But it applies to Night.
It must be argued by night. And I will undertake to maintain it
successfully on any gusty winter's night appointed for the purpose, with
any one opponent chosen from the rest, who will meet me singly in an old
churchyard, before an old church door; and will previously empower me to
lock him in, if needful to his satisfaction, until morning.

For the night-wind has a dismal trick of wandering round and round a
building of that sort, and moaning as it goes; and of trying with its
unseen hand, the windows and the doors; and seeking out some crevices by
which to enter. And when it has got in; as one not finding what it
seeks, whatever that may be, it wails and howls to issue forth again;
and not content with stalking through the aisles, and gliding round and
round the pillars, and tempting the deep organ, soars up to the roof,
and strives to rend the rafters; then flings itself despairingly upon
the stones below, and passes, muttering, into the vaults. Ugh! Heaven
preserve us, sitting snugly round the fire! It has an awful voice, that
wind at midnight, singing in a church!

But, high up in the steeple! There the foul blast roars and whistles!
High up in the steeple, where it is free to come and go through many an
airy arch and loophole, and to twist and twine itself about the giddy
stair, and twirl the groaning weathercock, and make the very tower shake
and shiver!

High up in the steeple of an old church, far above the light and murmur
of the town and far below the flying clouds that shadow it, is the wild
and dreary place at night: and high up in the steeple of an old church,
dwelt the Chimes I tell of.

They were old Chimes, trust me. Centuries ago, these Bells had been
baptized by bishops: so many centuries ago, that the register of their
baptism was lost long, long before the memory of man, and no one knew
their names. They had had their Godfathers and Godmothers, these Bells
(for my part, by the way, I would rather incur the responsibility of
being Godfather to a Bell than a Boy), and had had their silver mugs, no
doubt, besides. But Time had mowed down their sponsors, and Henry the
Eighth had melted down their mugs; and they now hung, nameless and
mugless, in the church tower.

Not speechless, though. Far from it. They had clear, loud, lusty,
sounding voices, had these Bells; and far and wide they might be heard
upon the wind. Much too sturdy Chimes were they, to be dependent on the
pleasure of the wind, moreover; for, fighting gallantly against it when
it took an adverse whim, they would pour their cheerful notes into a
listening ear right royally; and bent on being heard, on stormy nights,
by some poor mother watching a sick child, or some lone wife whose
husband was at sea, they had been sometimes known to beat a blustering
Nor'Wester; ay, "all to fits," as Toby Veck said;--for though they chose
to call him Trotty Veck, his name was Toby, and nobody could make it
anything else either (except Tobias); he having been as lawfully
christened in his day as the bells had been in theirs, though with not
quite so much of solemnity or public rejoicing.

For my part, I confess myself of Toby Veck's belief, for I am sure he
had opportunities enough of forming a correct one. And whatever Toby
Veck said, I say. And I take my stand by Toby Veck, although he _did_
stand all day long (and weary work it was) just outside the church-door.
In fact he was a ticket-porter, Toby Veck, and waited there for jobs.

And a breezy, goose-skinned, blue-nosed, red-eyed, stony-toed,
tooth-chattering place it was to wait in, in the winter-time, as Toby
Veck well knew. The wind came tearing round the corner--especially the
east wind--as if it had sallied forth, express, from the confines of the
earth, to have a blow at Toby. And oftentimes it seemed to come upon him
sooner than it had expected, for bouncing round the corner, and passing
Toby, it would suddenly wheel round again, as if it cried "Why, here he
is!"

Toby was curious about the Bells because there were points of
resemblance between them and him. They hung there in all weathers, with
the wind and rain driving in upon them; facing only the outsides of all
the houses; never getting any nearer to the blazing fires that gleamed
and shone upon the windows or came puffing out of the chimney tops; and
incapable of participating in any of the good things that were
constantly being handed through the street doors and iron railings to
prodigious cooks. Being but a simple man, he invested the Bells with a
strange and solemn character. They were so mysterious, often heard and
never seen; so high up, so far off, so full of such a deep, strong
melody, that he regarded them with a species of awe; and sometimes when
he looked up at the dark arched windows in the tower, he half expected
to be beckoned to by something which was not a Bell, and yet was what he
heard so often sounding in the Chimes. For all this Toby scouted with
indignation a certain flying rumor that the Chimes were haunted, as
implying the possibility of their being connected with any Evil thing.
In short, they were very often in his ears, and very often in his
thoughts, but always in his good opinion; and he very often got such a
crick in his neck by staring with his mouth wide open, at the steeple
where they hung, that he was fain to take an extra trot or two,
afterward, to cure it.

The very thing he was in the act of doing one cold day, when the last
drowsy sound of Twelve o'clock, just struck, was humming like a
melodious monster of a Bee, and not by any means a busy Bee, all through
the steeple?

"Dinner time, eh!" said Toby, trotting up and down before the church.
"Ah!"

Toby's nose was very red, and his eyelids were very red, and he winked
very much, and his shoulders were very near his ears, and his legs were
very stiff, and altogether he was evidently a long way upon the frosty
side of cool.

"Dinner time, eh!" repeated Toby, using his right hand muffler like an
infantine boxing-glove, and punishing his chest for being cold.
"Ah-h-h-h!"

He took a silent trot, after that, for a minute or two.

"There's nothing," said Toby, "more regular in its coming round than
dinner time, and nothing less regular in its coming round than dinner.
That's the great difference between 'em. It's took me a long time to
find it out. I wonder whether it would be worth any gentleman's while,
now, to buy that obserwation for the Papers; or the Parliament!"

Tony was only joking, for he gravely shook his head in
self-depreciation.

"Why! Lord!" said Toby. "The Papers is full of obserwations as it is;
and so's the Parliament. Here's last week's paper, now;" taking a very
dirty one from his pocket, and holding it from him at arm's length;
"full of obserwations! Full of obserwations! I like to know the news as
well as any man," said Toby, slowly; folding it a little smaller, and
putting it in his pocket again: "but it almost goes against the grain
with me to read a paper now. It frightens me almost. I don't know what
we poor people are coming to. Lord send we may be coming to something
better in the New Year nigh upon us!"

"Why, father, father!" said a pleasant voice, hard by.

But Toby, not hearing it continued to trot backward and forward: musing
as he went, and talking to himself.

"It seems as if we can't go right, or do right, or be righted," said
Toby. "I hadn't much schooling, myself, when I was young; and I can't
make out whether we have any business on the face of the earth, or not.
Sometimes I think we must have--a little; and sometimes I think we must
be intruding. I get so puzzled sometimes that I am not even able to make
up my mind whether there is any good at all in us, or whether we are
born bad. We seem to do dreadful things; we seem to give a deal of
trouble; we are always being complained of and guarded against. One way
or another, we fill the papers. Talk of a New Year!" said Toby,
mournfully. "I can bear up as well as another man at most times; better
than a good many, for I am as strong as a lion, and all men an't; but
supposing it should really be that we have no right to a New
Year--supposing we really _are_ intruding----"

"Why, father, father!" said the pleasant voice again.

Toby heard it this time; started; stopped; and shortening his sight,
which had been directed a long way off as seeking for enlightenment in
the very heart of the approaching year, found himself face to face with
his own child, and looking close into her eyes.

Bright eyes they were. Eyes that would bear a world of looking in,
before their depth was fathomed. Dark eyes, that reflected back the eyes
which searched them; not flashingly or at the owner's will, but with a
clear, calm, honest, patient radiance, claiming kindred with that light
which Heaven called into being. Eyes that were beautiful and true, and
beaming with Hope. With Hope so young and fresh; with Hope so buoyant,
vigorous and bright, despite the twenty years of work and poverty on
which they had looked; that they became a voice to Trotty Veck, and
said: "I think we have some business here--a little!"

Trotty kissed the lips belonging to the eyes, and squeezed the blooming
face between his hands.

"Why, Pet," said Trotty. "What's to-do? I didn't expect you, to-day,
Meg."

"Neither did I expect to come, father," cried the girl, nodding her head
and smiling as she spoke. "But here I am! And not alone; not alone!"

"Why you don't mean to say," observed Trotty, looking curiously at a
covered basket which she carried in her hand, "that you----"

"Smell it, father dear," said Meg, "Only smell it!"

Trotty was going to lift up the cover at once, in a great hurry, when
she gayly interposed her hand.

"No, no, no," said Meg, with the glee of a child. "Lengthen it out a
little. Let me just lift up the corner; just the lit-tle ti-ny cor-ner,
you know," said Meg, suiting the action to the word with the utmost
gentleness, and speaking very softly, as if she were afraid of being
overheard by something inside the basket; "there. Now. What's that!"

Toby took the shortest possible sniff at the edge of the basket, and
cried out in a rapture:

"Why, it's hot!"

"It is burning hot!" cried Meg. "Ha, ha, ha! It's scalding hot!"

"Ha, ha, ha!" roared Toby, with a sort of kick. "It's scalding hot!"

"But what is it father?" said Meg. "Come! you haven't guessed what it
is. And you must guess what it is. I can't think of taking it out till
you guess what it is. Don't be in such a hurry! Wait a minute! A little
bit more of the cover. Now guess!"

Meg was in a perfect fright lest he should guess right too soon;
shrinking away, as she held the basket toward him; curling up her pretty
shoulders; stopping her ear with her hand, as if by so doing she could
keep the right word out of Toby's lips; and laughing softly the whole
time.

Meanwhile Toby, putting a hand on each knee, bent down his nose to the
basket, and took a long inspiration at the lid; the grin upon his
withered face expanded in the process, as if he were inhaling laughing
gas.

"Ah! It's very nice," said Toby. "It ain't--I suppose it ain't
Polonies?"

"No, no, no!" cried Meg, delighted. "Nothing like Polonies!"

"No," said Toby, after another sniff. "It's--it's mellower than
Polonies. It's very nice. It improves every moment. It's too decided for
Trotters. Ain't it?"

Meg was in ecstasy. He could _not_ have gone wider of the mark than
Trotters--except Polonies.

"Liver?" said Toby, communing with himself. "No. There's a mildness
about it that don't answer to liver. Pettitoes? No. It an't faint enough
for pettitoes. It wants the stringiness of Cocks' heads. And I know it
an't sausages. I'll tell you what it is. It's chitterlings!"

"No, it an't!" cried Meg, in a burst of delight "No, it an't!"

"Why, what am I a thinking of!" said Toby, suddenly recovering a
position as near the perpendicular as it was possible for him to assume.
"I shall forget my own name next. It's tripe!"

Tripe it was; and Meg, in high joy, protested he should say, in half a
minute more, it was the best tripe ever stewed.

"And so," said Meg, busying herself exultingly with her basket; "I'll
lay the cloth at once, father; for I have brought the tripe in a basin,
and tied the basin up in a pocket-handkerchief; and if I like to be
proud for once, and spread that for a cloth, and call it a cloth,
there's no law to prevent me; is there father?"

"Not that I know of, my dear," said Toby. "But they're always a bringing
up some new law or other."

"And according to what I was reading you in the paper the other day,
father; what the Judge said, you know; we poor people are supposed to
know them all. Ha, ha! What a mistake! My goodness me, how clever they
think us!"

"Yes, my dear," cried Trotty; "and they'd be very fond of any one of us
that _did_ know 'em all. He'd grow fat upon the work he'd get, that man,
and be popular with the gentlefolks in his neighborhood. Very much so!"

"He'd eat his dinner with an appetite, whoever he was, if it smelt like
this," said Meg, cheerfully. "Make haste, for there's a potato besides.
Where will you dine, father? On the Post, or on the Steps? Dear, dear,
how grand we are. Two places to choose from!"

"The steps to day, my Pet," said Trotty. "Steps in dry weather. Post in
wet. There's a great conveniency in the steps at all times, because of
the sitting down; but they're rheumatic in the damp."

"Then here," said Meg, clapping her hands, after a moment's bustle;
"here it is, all ready! And beautiful it looks! Come, father. Eat it
while it's hot. Come!"

Since his discovery of the contents of the basket, Trotty had been
standing looking at her--and had been speaking too--in an abstracted
manner, which showed that though she was the object of his thoughts and
eyes, to the exclusion even of tripe, he neither saw nor thought about
her as she was at that moment, but had before him some imaginary rough
sketch or drama of her future life. Roused, now, by her cheerful
summons, he shook off a melancholy shake of the head which was just
coming upon him, and trotted to her side. As he was stooping to sit
down, the Chimes rang.

"Amen!" said Trotty, pulling off his hat and looking up toward them.

"Amen to the Bells, father?" cried Meg.

"They broke in like a grace, my dear," said Trotty, taking his seat.
"They'd say a good one, I am sure, if they could. Many's the kind thing
they say to me."

"The Bells do, father!" laughed Meg, as she set the basin, and a knife
and fork before him. "Well!"

"Seem to, my Pet," said Trotty, falling to with great vigor. "And
where's the difference? If I hear 'em, what does it matter whether they
speak it or not? Why bless you, my dear," said Toby, pointing at the
tower with his fork, and becoming more animated under the influence of
dinner, "how often have I heard them bells say, 'Toby Veck, Toby Veck,
keep a good heart Toby! Toby Veck, Toby Veck, keep a good heart Toby!' A
million times? More!"

"Well, I never!" cried Meg.

She had, though--over and over again. For it was Toby's constant topic.

"When things is very bad," said Trotty; "very bad indeed, I mean; almost
at the worst; then it's 'Toby Veck, Toby Veck, job coming soon, Toby!
Toby Veck, Toby Veck, job coming soon, Toby!' That way."

"And it comes--at last, father," said Meg, with a touch of sadness in
her pleasant voice.

"Always," answered the unconscious Toby. "Never fails."

While this discourse was holding, Trotty made no pause in his attack
upon the savory meat before him, but cut and ate, and cut and drank, and
cut and chewed, and dodged about, from tripe to hot potato, and from hot
potato back again to tripe, with an unctuous and unflagging relish. But
happening now to look all round the street--in case anybody should be
beckoning from any door or window, for a porter--his eyes, in coming
back again, encountered Meg: sitting opposite to him, with her arms
folded; and only busy in watching his progress with a smile of
happiness.

"Why, Lord forgive me!" said Trotty, dropping his knife and fork. "My
love! Meg! why didn't you tell me what a beast I was?"

"Father?"

"Sitting here," said Trotty, in penitent explanation, "cramming and
stuffing, and gorging myself; and you before me there, never so much as
breaking your precious fast, nor wanting to, when----"

"But I have broken it, father," interposed his daughter, laughing, "all
to bits. I have had my dinner."

"Nonsense," said Trotty. "Two dinners in one day! It an't possible! You
might as well tell me that two New Year's Days will come together, or
that I have had a gold head all my life, and never changed it."

"I have had my dinner, father, for all that," said Meg, coming nearer to
him. "And if you'll go on with yours, I'll tell you how and where; and
how your dinner came to be brought; and--something else besides."

Toby still appeared incredulous; but she looked into his face with her
clear eyes, and laying her hand upon his shoulder, motioned him to go on
while the meat was hot. So Trotty took up his knife and fork again, and
went to work. But much more slowly than before, and shaking his head, as
if he were not at all pleased with himself.

"I had my dinner, father," said Meg, after a little hesitation,
"with--with Richard. His dinner-time was early; and as he brought his
dinner with him when he came to see me, we--we had it together, father."

Trotty said, "Oh!"--because she waited.

"And Richard says, father--" Meg resumed. Then stopped.

"What does Richard say, Meg?" asked Toby.

"Richard says, father--" Another stoppage.

"Richard's a long time saying it," said Toby.

"He says then, father," Meg continued, lifting up her eyes at last, and
speaking in a tremble, but quite plainly; "another year is nearly gone,
and where is the use of waiting on from year to year, when it is so
unlikely we shall ever be better off than we are now? He says we are
poor now, father, and we shall be poor then, but we are young now, and
years will make us old before we know it. He says that if we wait,
people in our condition, until we see our way quite clearly, the way
will be a narrow one indeed--the common way--the Grave, father."

A bolder man than Trotty Veck must needs have drawn upon his boldness
largely, to deny it. Trotty held his peace.

"And how hard, father, to grow old and die, and think we might have
cheered and helped each other! How hard in all our lives to love each
other; and to grieve, apart, to see each other working, changing,
growing old and gray. Even if I got the better of it, and forgot him
(which I never could), oh, father dear, how hard to have a heart so full
as mine is now, and live to have it slowly drained out every drop,
without the recollection of one happy moment of a woman's life, to stay
behind and comfort me, and make me better!"

Trotty sat quite still, Meg dried her eyes, and said more gayly: that is
to say, with here a laugh, and there a sob, and here a laugh and sob
together:

"So Richard says, father; as his work was yesterday made certain for
some time to come, and as I love him and have loved him fully three
years--ah! longer than that, if he knew it!--will I marry him on New
Year's Day; the best and happiest day, he says, in the whole year, and
one that is almost sure to bring good fortune with it. It's a short
notice, father--isn't it?--but I haven't my fortune to be settled, or my
wedding dresses to be made, like the great ladies, father, have I? And
he said so much, and said it in his way; so strong and earnest, and all
the time so kind and gentle; that I said I'd come and talk to you,
father. And as they paid the money for that work of mine this morning
(unexpectedly, I am sure!), and as you have fared very poorly for a
whole week, and as I couldn't help wishing there should be something to
make this day a sort of holiday to you as well as a dear and happy day
to me, father, I made a little treat and brought it to surprise you."

"And see how he leaves it cooling on the step!" said another voice.

It was the voice of the same Richard, who had come upon them unobserved,
and stood before the father and daughter; looking down upon them with a
face as glowing as the iron on which his stout sledge-hammer daily rung.
A handsome, well-made, powerful youngster he was; with eyes that
sparkled like the red-hot droppings from a furnace fire; black hair that
curled about his swarthy temples rarely; and a smile--a smile that bore
out Meg's eulogium on his style of conversation.

"See how he leaves it cooling on the step!" said Richard. "Meg don't
know what he likes. Not she!"

Trotty, all action and enthusiasm, immediately reached up his hand to
Richard, and was going to address him in a great hurry, when the
house-door opened without any warning, and a footman very nearly put his
foot in the tripe.

"Out of the vays here, will you! You must always go and be a-settin on
our steps, must you! You can't go and give a turn to none of the
neighbors never, can't you? _Will_ you clear the road, or won't you?"

Strictly speaking, the last question was irrelevant, as they had already
done it.

"What's the matter, what's the matter?" said the gentleman for whom the
door was opened; coming out of the house at that kind of light, heavy
pace--that peculiar compromise between a walk and jog-trot--with which a
gentleman upon the smooth down-hill of life, wearing creaking boots, a
watch-chain, and clean linen, _may_ come out of his house: not only
without any abatement of his dignity, but with an expression of having
important and wealthy engagements elsewhere. "What's the matter? What's
the matter?"

"You're always a-being begged, and prayed, upon your bended knees, you
are," said the footman with great emphasis to Trotty Veck, "to let our
door-steps be. Why don't you let 'em be? CAN'T you let 'em be?"

"There! That'll do, that'll do!" said the gentleman, "Halloa there!
Porter!" beckoning with his head to Trotty Veck, "Come here. What's
that? Your dinner?"

"Yes, sir," said Trotty, leaving it behind him in a corner.

"Don't leave it there!" exclaimed the gentleman. "Bring it here, bring
it here! So! this is your dinner, is it?"

"Yes, sir," repeated Trotty, looking with a fixed eye and a watery mouth
at the piece of tripe he had reserved for a last delicious tit-bit,
which the gentleman was now turning over and over on the end of a fork.

Two other gentlemen had come out with him. One was a low-spirited
gentleman of middle age, of a meagre habit, and a disconsolate face; who
kept his hands continually in the pockets of his scanty pepper-and-salt
trousers, very large and dog's-eared from that custom; and was not
particularly well brushed or washed. The other, a full sized, sleek,
well-conditioned gentleman, in a blue coat, with bright buttons, and a
white cravat. This gentleman had a very red face, as if an undue
proportion of the blood in his body were squeezed up into his head,
which perhaps accounted for his having also the appearance of being
rather cold about the heart.

He who had Toby's meat upon the fork called to the first one by the name
of Filer, and they both drew near together. Mr. Filer being exceedingly
short sighted, was obliged to go so close to the remnant of Toby's
dinner before he could make out what it was, that Toby's heart leaped up
into his mouth. But Mr. Filer didn't eat it.

"This is a description of animal food, Alderman," said Filer, making
little punches in it with a pencil-case, "commonly known to the laboring
population of this country by the name of tripe."

The Alderman laughed, and winked; for he was a merry fellow. Alderman
Cute. Oh, and a sly fellow too! A knowing fellow. Up to everything. Not
to be imposed upon. Deep in the people's hearts! He knew them, Cute did.
I believe you!

"But who eats tripe?" said Mr. Filer, looking round. "Tripe is without
an exception the least economical, and the most wasteful article of
consumption that the markets of this country can by possibility produce.
The loss upon a pound of tripe has been found to be, in the boiling,
seven-eighths of a fifth more than the loss upon a pound of any other
animal substance whatever. Tripe is more expensive, properly understood,
than the hot-house pine-apple. Taking into account the number of animals
slaughtered yearly within the bills of mortality alone; and forming a
low estimate of the quantity of tripe which the carcases of these
animals, reasonably well butchered, would yield--I find that the waste
on that amount of tripe, if boiled, would victual a garrison of five
hundred men for five months of thirty-one days each, and a February
over. The Waste, the Waste!"

Trotty stood aghast, and his legs shook under him. He seemed to have
starved a garrison of five hundred men with his own hand.

"Who eats tripe?" said Mr. Filer, warmly. "Who eats tripe?"

Trotty made a miserable bow.

"You do, do you?" said Mr. Filer. "Then I'll tell you something. You
snatch your tripe, my friend, out of the mouths of widows and orphans."

"I hope not, sir," said Trotty, faintly. "I'd sooner die of want!"

"Divide the amount of tripe before-mentioned, Alderman," said Mr. Filer,
"by the estimated number of existing widows and orphans, and the result
will be one pennyweight of tripe to each. Not a grain is left for that
man. Consequently, he's a robber."

Trotty was so shocked that it gave him no concern to see the Alderman
finish the tripe himself. It was a relief to get rid of it, anyhow.

"And what do you say?" asked the Alderman, jocosely, of the red-faced
gentleman in the blue coat. "You have heard friend Filer. What do _you_
say?"

"What's it possible to say?" returned the gentleman. "What _is_ to be
said? Who can take any interest in a fellow like this," meaning Trotty,
"in such degenerate times as these? Look at him! What an object! The
good old times, the grand old times, the great old times! _Those_ were
the times for a bold peasantry, and all that sort of thing. Those were
the times for every sort of thing, in fact. There's nothing now-a-days.
Ah!" sighed the red-faced gentleman. "The good old times, the good old
times!"

It is possible that poor Trotty's faith in these very vague Old Times
was not entirely destroyed, for he felt vague enough, at that moment.
One thing, however, was plain to him, in the midst of his distress; to
wit, that however these gentlemen might differ in details, his
misgivings of that morning, and of many other mornings, were well
founded. "No, no. We can't go right or do right," thought Trotty in
despair. "There is no good in us. We are born bad!"

But Trotty had a father's heart within him; which had somehow got into
his breast in spite of this decree; and he could not bear that Meg, in
the blush of her brief joy, should have her fortune read by these wise
gentlemen. "God help her," thought poor Trotty. "She will know it soon
enough."

He anxiously signed, therefore, to the young smith, to take her away.
But he was so busy, talking to her softly at a little distance, that he
only became conscious of this desire, simultaneously with Alderman Cute.
Now, the Alderman had not yet had his say, but _he_ was a philosopher,
too--practical though! Oh, very practical!--and, as he had no idea of
losing any portion of his audience, he cried "Stop!"

Trotty took Meg's hand and drew it through his arm. He didn't seem to
know what he was doing though.

"Your daughter, eh?" said the Alderman, chucking her familiarly under
the chin.

"And you're making love to her, are you?" said Cute to the young smith.

"Yes," returned Richard quickly, for he was nettled by the question.
"And we are going to be married on New Year's Day."

"What do you mean?" cried Filer sharply. "Married!"

"Why, yes, we were thinking of it. Master," said Richard. "We're rather
in a hurry you see, in case it should be Put Down first."

"Ah!" cried Filer, with a groan. "Put _that_ down indeed. Alderman, and
you'll do something. Married! Married!! The ignorance of the first
principles of political economy on the part of these people; their
improvidence; their wickedness is by Heavens! enough to--Now look at
that couple, will you!"

Well! They were worth looking at. And marriage seemed as reasonable and
fair a deed as they need have in contemplation.

"A man may live to be as old as Methuselah," said Mr. Filer, "and may
labor all his life for the benefit of such people as those; and may heap
up facts on figures, facts on figures, facts on figures, mountains high
and dry; and he can no more hope to persuade 'em that they have no right
or business to be married than he can hope to persuade 'em that they
have no earthly right or business to be born. And _that_ we know they
haven't. We reduced that to a mathematical certainty long ago!"

"Come here, my girl!" said Alderman Cute.

The young blood of her lover had been mounting, wrathfully, within the
last few minutes; and he was indisposed to let her come. But, setting a
constraint upon himself, he came forward with a stride as Meg approached
and stood beside her. Trotty kept her hand within his arm still, but
looked from face to face as wildly as a sleeper in a dream.

"Now, I'm going to give you a word or two of good advice, my girl," said
the Alderman, in his nice easy way. "It's my place to give advice, you
know, because I'm a Justice. You know I'm a Justice, don't you?"

Meg timidly said, "Yes." But everybody knew Alderman Cute was a Justice!
Oh dear, so active a Justice always! Who such a mote of brightness in
the public eye, as Cute!

"You are going to be married, you say," pursued the Alderman. "Very
unbecoming and indelicate in one of your sex! But never mind that.
After you're married, you'll quarrel with your husband, and come to be a
distressed wife. You may think not; but you will, because I tell you so.
Now, I give you fair warning, that I have made up my mind to Put
distressed wives Down. So, don't be brought before me. You'll have
children--boys. Those boys will grow up bad, of course, and run wild in
the streets without shoes or stockings. Mind, my young friend! I'll
convict 'em summarily every one, for I am determined to Put boys without
shoes or stockings, Down. Perhaps your husband will die young (most
likely) and leave you with a baby. Then you'll be turned out of doors,
and wander up and down the streets. Now don't wander near me, my dear,
for I am resolved to Put all wandering mothers Down. All young mothers,
of all sorts and kinds, it's my determination to Put Down. Don't think
to plead illness as an excuse with me; or babies as an excuse with me;
for all sick persons and young children (I hope you know the
church-service, but I'm afraid not) I am determined to Put Down. And if
you attempt, desperately and ungratefully, and impiously, and
fraudulently attempt, to drown yourself, or hang yourself, I'll have no
pity on you, for I have made up my mind to Put all suicide Down! If
there is one thing," said the Alderman, with his self-satisfied smile,
"on which I can be said to have made up my mind more than on another, it
is to Put suicide Down. So don't try it on. That's the phrase, isn't it!
Ha, ha! now we understand each other."

Toby knew not whether to be agonized or glad, to see that Meg had turned
deadly white, and dropped her lover's hand.

"As for you, you dull dog," said the Alderman, turning with even
increased cheerfulness and urbanity to the young smith, "what are you
thinking of being married for? What do you want to be married for, you
silly fellow? If I was a fine, young, strapping chap like you, I should
be ashamed of being milksop enough to pin myself to a woman's
apron-strings! Why, she'll be an old woman before you're a middle-aged
man! And a pretty figure you'll cut then, with a draggle-tailed wife and
a crowd of squalling children crying after you wherever you go!"

Oh, he knew how to banter the common people, Alderman Cute!

"There! Go along with you," said the Alderman, "and repent. Don't make
such a fool of yourself as to get married on New Year's Day. You'll
think very differently of it, long before next New Year's Day: a trim
young fellow like you, with all the girls looking after you. There! Go
along with you!"

They went along. Not arm in arm, or hand in hand, or interchanging
bright glances; but she in tears; he gloomy and down-looking. Were these
the hearts that had so lately made old Toby's leap up from its
faintness? No, no. The Alderman (a blessing on his head!) had Put _them_
Down.

"As you happen to be here," said the Alderman to Toby, "you shall carry
a letter for me. Can you be quick? You're an old man."

Toby, who had been looking after Meg, quite stupidly, made shift to
murmur out that he was very quick, and very strong.

"How old are you?" inquired the Alderman.

"I am over sixty, sir," said Toby.

"Oh! This man's a great deal past the average age, you know," cried Mr.
Filer, breaking in as if his patience would bear some trying, but this
was really carrying matters a little too far.

"I feel I'm intruding, sir," said Toby. "I--I misdoubted it this
morning. Oh dear me!"

The Alderman cut him short by giving him the letter from his pocket.
Toby would have got a shilling too; but Mr. Filer clearly showing that
in that case he would rob a certain given number of persons of
ninepence-half-penny a-piece, he only got sixpence; and thought himself
very well off to get that.

Then the Alderman gave an arm to each of his friends, and walked off in
high feather; but, he immediately came hurrying back alone, as if he had
forgotten something.

"Porter!" said the Alderman.

"Sir!" said Toby.

"Take care of that daughter of yours. She's much too handsome."

"Even her good looks are stolen from somebody or other I suppose,"
thought Toby, looking at the sixpence in his hand, and thinking of the
tripe. "She's been and robbed five hundred ladies of a bloom a-piece, I
shouldn't wonder. It's very dreadful!"

"She's much too handsome, my man," repeated the Alderman. "The chances
are, that she'll come to no good, I clearly see. Observe what I say.
Take care of her!" With which, he hurried off again.

"Wrong every way. Wrong every way!" said Trotty clasping his hands.
"Born bad. No business here!"

The Chimes came clashing in upon him as he said the last words. Full,
loud, and sounding--but with no encouragement. No, not a drop.

"The tune's changed," cried the old man, as he listened. "There's not a
word of all that fancy in it. Why should there be? I have no business
with the New Year nor with the old one neither. Let me die!"

Still the Bells, pealing forth their changes, made the very air spin.
Put 'em down. Put 'em down! Good old Times, Good old Times! Facts and
Figures, Facts and Figures! Put 'em down, Put 'em down! If they said
anything they said this, until the brain of Toby reeled.

He pressed his bewildered head between his hands as if to keep it from
splitting asunder. A well-timed action, as it happened; for finding the
letter in one of them, and being by that means reminded of his charge,
he fell, mechanically, into his usual trot, and trotted off.


SECOND QUARTER.

The letter Toby had received from Alderman Cute, was addressed to a
great man in the great district of the town. The greatest district of
the town. It must have been the greatest district of the town, because
it was commonly called "the world" by its inhabitants.

The Year was Old, that day. The patient Year had lived through the
reproaches and misuses of its slanderers, and faithfully performed its
work. Spring, summer, autumn, winter. It had labored through the
destined round, and now laid down its weary head to die.

Trotty had no portion, to his thinking, in the New Year or the Old.

"Put 'em down. Put 'em down! Facts and Figures, Facts and Figures! Good
old Times, Good old Times! Put 'em down, Put 'em down!"--his trot went
to that measure, and would fit itself to nothing else.

But, even that one, melancholy as it was, brought him, in due time, to
the end of his journey. To the mansion of Sir Joseph Bowley, Member of
Parliament.

The door was opened by a Porter. Such a Porter! Not of Toby's order.
Quite another thing. His place was the ticket, though; not Toby's.

This Porter underwent some hard panting before he could speak; having
breathed himself by coming incautiously out of his chair, without first
taking time to think about it and compose his mind. When he had found
his voice--which it took him some time to do, for it was a long way off
and hidden under a load of meat--he said in a fat whisper:

"Who's it from?"

Toby told him.

"You're to take it in yourself," said the Porter, pointing to a room at
the end of a long passage, opening from the hall. "Everything goes
straight in, on this day of the year. You're not a bit too soon; for the
carriage is at the door now, and they have only come to town for a
couple of hours, a'purpose."

Toby wiped his feet (which were quite dry already) with great care, and
took the way pointed out to him, observing as he went that it was an
awfully grand house, but hushed and covered up, as if the family were in
the country. Knocking at the room door, he was told to enter from
within; and doing so found himself in a spacious library, where, at a
table strewn with files and papers, were a stately lady in a bonnet, and
a not very stately gentleman in black, who wrote from her dictation;
while another, and an older, and a much statelier gentleman, whose hat
and cane were on the table, walked up and down, with one hand in his
breast, and looked complacently from time to time at his own picture--a
full length; a very full length--hanging over the fire-place.

"What is this?" said the last-named gentleman. "Mr. Fish, will you have
the goodness to attend?"

Mr. Fish begged pardon, and taking the letter from Toby, handed it, with
great respect.

"From Alderman Cute, Sir Joseph."

"Is this all? Have you nothing else, Porter?" inquired Sir Joseph.

Toby replied in the negative.

"You have no bill or demand upon me--my name is Bowley, Sir Joseph
Bowley--of any kind from anybody, have you?" said Sir Joseph. "If you
have, present it. There is a cheque-book by the side of Mr. Fish. I
allow nothing to be carried into the New Year. Every description of
account is settled in this house at the close of the old one. So that if
death was to--to--"

"To cut," suggested Mr. Fish.

"To sever, sir," returned Sir Joseph, with great asperity, "the cord of
existence--my affairs would be found, I hope, in a state of
preparation."

"My dear Sir Joseph!" said the lady, who was greatly younger than the
gentleman. "How shocking!"

"My Lady Bowley," returned Sir Joseph, floundering now and then, as in
the great depth of his observations, "at this season of the year we
should think of--of--ourselves. We should look into our--our accounts.
We should feel that every return of so eventful a period in human
transactions involves matter of deep moment between a man and his--and
his banker."

Sir Joseph delivered these words as if he felt the full morality of what
he was saying, and desired that even Trotty should have an opportunity
of being improved by such discourse. Possibly he had this end before him
in still forbearing to break the seal of the letter, and in telling
Trotty to wait where he was a minute.

"I _am_ the Poor Man's Friend," observed Sir Joseph, glancing at the
poor man present. "As such I may be taunted. As such I have been
taunted. But I ask no other title."

"Bless him for a noble gentleman!" thought Trotty.

"I don't agree with Cute here, for instance," said Sir Joseph, holding
out the letter. "I don't agree with the Filer party. I don't agree with
any party. My friend, the Poor Man, has no business with any thing of
that sort, and nothing of that sort has any business with him. My
friend, the Poor Man, in my district, is my business. No man or body of
men has any right to interfere between my friend and me. That is the
ground I take. I assume a--a paternal character toward my friend. I say,
'My good fellow, I will treat you paternally.'"

With that great sentiment, he opened the Alderman's letter, and read it.

"Very polite and attentive, I am sure!" exclaimed Sir Joseph. "My lady,
the Alderman is so obliging as to remind me that he has had 'the
distinguished honor'--he is very good--of meeting me at the house of our
mutual friend Deedles, the banker, and he does me the favor to inquire
whether it will be agreeable to me to have Will Fern put down. He came
up to London, it seems, to look for employment (trying to better
himself--that's his story), and being found at night asleep in a shed,
was taken into custody, and carried next morning before the Alderman.
The Alderman observes (very properly) that he is determined to put this
sort of thing down, and that if it will be agreeable to me to have Will
Fern put down, he will be happy to begin with him."

"Let him be made an example of, by all means," returned the lady. "Last
winter, when I introduced pinking and eyelet-holing among the men and
boys in the village as a nice evening employment, and had the lines,


     Oh let us love our occupations,
     Bless the squire and his relations,
     Live upon our daily rations,
     And always know our proper stations,


set to music on the new system, for them to sing the while; this very
Fern--I see him now--touched that hat of his, and said, 'I humbly ask
your pardon, my lady, but _an't_ I something different from a great
girl?' I expected it, of course; who can expect anything but insolence
and ingratitude from that class of people? That is not to the purpose,
however. Sir Joseph! Make an example of him!"

Trotty, who had long ago relapsed, and was very low-spirited, stepped
forward with a rueful face to take the letter Sir Joseph held out to
him.

"You have heard, perhaps," said Sir Joseph, oracularly, "certain remarks
into which I have been led respecting the solemn period of time at which
we have arrived, and the duty imposed upon us of settling our affairs,
and being prepared. Now, my friend, can you lay your hand upon your
heart, and say that you also have made preparation for a New Year?"

"I am afraid, sir," stammered Trotty, looking meekly at him, "that I am
a--a--little behind-hand with the world."

"Behind-hand with the world!" repeated Sir Joseph Bowley, in a tone of
terrible distinctness.

"I am afraid, sir," faltered Trotty, "that there's a matter of ten or
twelve shillings owing to Mrs. Chickenstalker."

"To Mrs. Chickenstalker!" repeated Sir Joseph, in the same tone as
before.

"A shop, sir," exclaimed Toby, "in the general line. Also a--a little
money on account of rent. A very little, sir. It oughtn't to be owing, I
know, but we have been hard put to it, indeed!"

Sir Joseph looked at his lady, and at Mr. Fish, and at Trotty, one after
another, twice all round. He then made a despondent gesture with both
hands at once, as if he gave the thing up altogether.

"How a man, even among this improvident and impracticable race; an old
man; a man grown grey; can look a New Year in the face with his affairs
in this condition; how he can lie down on his bed at night, and get up
again in the morning, and--There!" he said, turning his back on Trotty.

"Take the letter! Take the letter!"

"I heartily wish it was otherwise, sir," said Trotty, anxious to excuse
himself. "We have been tried very hard."

Sir Joseph still repeating "Take the letter, take the letter!" and Mr.
Fish not only saying the same thing, but giving additional force to the
request by motioning the bearer to the door, he had nothing for it but
to make his bow and leave the house. And in the street, poor Trotty
pulled his worn old hat down on his head to hide the grief he felt at
getting no hold on the New Year, anywhere.

He didn't even lift his hat to look up at the Bell tower when he came to
the old church on his return. He halted there a moment, from habit; and
knew that it was growing dark and that the steeple rose above him
indistinct and faint in the murky air. He knew, too, that the Chimes
would ring immediately, and that they sounded to his fancy, at such a
time, like voices in the clouds. But he only made the more haste to
deliver the Alderman's letter and get out of the way before they began;
for he dreaded to hear them tagging "Friends and Fathers, Friends and
Fathers," to the burden they had rung out last.

Toby discharged himself of his commission, therefore, with all possible
speed and set off trotting homeward. But what with his pace, which was
at best an awkward one in the street; and what with his hat, which
didn't improve it; he trotted against somebody in less than no time and
was sent staggering out into the road.

"I beg your pardon, I'm sure!" said Trotty, pulling up his hat in great
confusion, and between the hat and the torn lining, fixing his head
into a kind of bee-hive. "I hope I haven't hurt you."

As to hurting anybody, Toby was not such an absolute Samson, but that he
was much more likely to be hurt himself; and indeed he had flown out
into the road like a shuttle-cock. He had such an opinion of his own
strength, however, that he was in real concern for the other party, and
said again,

"I hope I haven't hurt you?"

The man against whom he had run, a sun-browned, sinewy, country-looking
man, with grizzled hair and a rough chin, stared at him for a moment, as
if he suspected him to be in jest. But, satisfied of his good faith, he
answered:

"No, friend. You have not hurt me."

"Nor the child, I hope?" said Trotty.

"Nor the child," returned the man. "I thank you kindly."

As he said so, he glanced at a little girl he carried in his arms,
asleep, and shading her face with the long end of the poor handkerchief
he wore about his throat, went slowly on.

The tone in which he said "I thank you kindly," penetrated Trotty's
heart. He was so jaded and foot sore, and so soiled with travel, and
looked about him so forlorn and strange, that it was a comfort to him to
be able to thank anyone, no matter for how little. Toby stood gazing
after him as he plodded wearily away, with the child's arm clinging
round his neck.

At the figure in the worn shoes--now the very shade and ghost of
shoes--rough leather leggings, common frock and broad slouched hat,
Trotty stood gazing, blind to the whole street. And at the child's arm,
clinging round its neck.

Before he merged into the darkness the traveler stopped, and looking
round and seeing Trotty standing there yet, seemed undecided whether to
return or go on. After doing first the one and then the other, he came
back, and Trotty went half way to meet him.

"You can tell me, perhaps," said the man with a faint smile, "and if you
can I am sure will, and I'd rather ask you than another--where Alderman
Cute lives."

"Close at hand," replied Toby, "I'll show you his house with pleasure."

"I was to have gone to him elsewhere to-morrow," said the man,
accompanying Toby, "but I am uneasy under suspicion, and want to clear
myself and to be free to go and seek my bread--I don't know where. So,
maybe he'll forgive my going to his house to-night."

"It's impossible," cried Toby with a start, "that your name's Fern!"

"Eh!" cried the other, turning on him in astonishment.

"Fern! Will Fern!" said Trotty.

"That's my name," replied the other.

"Why, then," cried Trotty, seizing him by the arm and looking cautiously
round, "for Heaven's sake don't go to him! Don't go to him! He'll put
you down as sure as ever you were born. Here, come up this alley, and
I'll tell you what I mean. Don't go to _him_."

His new acquaintance looked as if he thought him mad, but he bore him
company, nevertheless. When they were shrouded from observation, Trotty
told him what he knew, and what character he had received, and all about
it.

The subject of his history listened to it with a calmness that surprised
him. He did not contradict or interrupt it once. He nodded his head now
and then--more in corroboration of an old and worn-out story, it
appeared, than in refutation of it; and once or twice threw back his
hat, and passed his freckled hand over a brow, where every furrow he
had ploughed seemed to have set its image in little. But he did no more.

"It's true enough in the main," he said, "master, I could sift grain
from the husk here and there, but let it be as 'tis. What odds? I have
gone against his plans; to my misfortun'. I can't help it; I should do
the like to-morrow. As to character, them gentlefolks will search and
search, and pry and pry, and have it as free from spot or speck in us,
afore they'll help us to a dry good word!--Well! I hope they don't lose
good opinion as easy as we do, or their lives is strict indeed, and
hardly worth the keeping. For myself, master, I never took with that
hand"--holding it before him--"what wasn't my own; and never held it
back from work, however hard, or poorly paid. Whoever can deny it, let
him chop it off! But when work won't maintain me like a human creetur;
when my living is so bad, that I am Hungry, out of doors and in; when I
see a whole working life begin that way, go on that way, and end that
way, without a chance or change; then I say to the gentlefolks 'Keep
away from me! Let my cottage be. My doors is dark enough without your
darkening of 'em more. Don't look for me to come up into the Park to
help the show when there's a Birthday, or a fine Speechmaking, or what
not. Act your Plays and Games without me, and be welcome to 'em and
enjoy 'em. We've now to do with one another. I'm best let alone!'"

Seeing that the child in his arms had opened her eyes, and was looking
about in wonder, he checked himself to say a word or two of foolish
prattle in her ear, and stand her on the ground beside him. Then slowly
winding one of her long tresses round and round his rough forefinger
like a ring, while she hung about his dusty leg, he said to Trotty,

"I'm not a cross-grained man by natur', I believe; and easy satisfied,
I'm sure. I bear no ill will against none of 'em. I only want to live
like one of the Almighty's creeturs. I can't--I don't--and so there's a
pit dug between me, and them that can and do. There's others like me.
You might tell 'em off by hundreds and by thousands, sooner than by
ones."

Trotty knew that he spoke the truth in this, and shook his head to
signify as much.

"I've got a bad name this way," said Fern; "and I'm not likely, I'm
afeared, to get a better. 'Tan't lawful to be out of sorts, and I AM out
of sorts, though God knows, I'd sooner bear a cheerful spirit if I
could. Well! I don't know as this Alderman could hurt _me_ much by
sending me to gaol; but without a friend to speak a word for me, he
might do it; and you see--!" pointing downward with his finger, at the
child.

He sunk his voice so low, and gazed upon her with an air so stern and
strange, that Toby, to divert the current of his thoughts, inquired if
his wife were living.

"I never had one," he returned, shaking his head. "She's my brother's
child: a orphan. Nine year old, though you'd hardly think it; but she's
tired and worn out now. They'd have taken care on her in the
Union--eight and twenty mile away from where we live--between four walls
(as they took care of my old father when he couldn't work no more,
though he didn't trouble 'em long); but I took her instead, and she's
lived with me ever since. Her mother had a friend once, in London here.
We are trying to find her, and to find work too; but it's a large place.
Never mind. More room for us to walk about in, Lilly!"

Meeting the child's eyes with a smile which melted Toby more than tears,
he shook him by the hand.

"I don't so much as know your name," he said, "but I've opened my heart
free to you, for I'm thankful to you; with good reason. I'll take your
advice and keep clear of this--"

"Justice," suggested Toby.

"Ah!" he said. "If that's the name they give him. This Justice. And
to-morrow will try whether there's better fortun' to be met with
somewheres near London. Goodnight. A Happy New Year!"

"Stay!" cried Trotty, catching at his hand, as he relaxed his grip.
"Stay! The New Year never can be happy to me, if we part like this. The
New Year can never be happy to me, if I see the child and you go
wandering away, you don't know where, without a shelter for your heads.
Come home with me! I'm a poor man, living in a poor place; but I can
give you lodging for one night and never miss it. Come home with me!
Here! I'll take her!" cried Trotty, lifting up the child. "A pretty one!
I'd carry twenty times her weight, and never know I'd got it. Tell me if
I go too quick for you. I'm very fast. I always was!" Trotty said this,
taking about six of his trotting paces to one stride of his fatigued
companion; and with his thin legs quivering again, beneath the load he
bore.

"Down the Mews here, Uncle Will, and step at the black door, with 'T.
Veck, Ticket Porter,' wrote upon a board; and here we are, and here we
go, and here we are indeed, my precious Meg, surprising you!"

With which words Trotty, in a breathless state, set the child down
before his daughter in the middle of the floor. The little visitor
looked once at Meg; and doubting nothing in that face, but trusting
everything she saw there; ran into her arms.

"Here we are, and here we go!" cried Trotty, running round the room and
choking audibly. "Here, Uncle Will, here's a fire you know! Why don't
you come to the fire? Oh here we are and here we go! Meg, my precious
darling, where's the kettle? Here it is and here it goes, and it'll bile
in no time!"

Trotty really had picked up the kettle somewhere or other in the course
of his wild career, and now put it on the fire; while Meg, seating the
child in a warm corner, knelt down on the ground before her, and pulled
off her shoes, and dried her wet feet on a cloth. Ay, and she laughed at
Trotty too--so pleasantly, so cheerfully, that Trotty could have blessed
her where she kneeled; for he had seen that, when they entered, she was
sitting by the fire in tears.

"Why, father!" said Meg. "You're crazy to-night, I think. I don't know
what the Bells would say to that."

Meg looked toward him and saw that he had elaborately stationed himself
behind the chair of their male visitor, where with many mysterious
gestures he was holding up the six-pence he had earned.

"I see, my dear," said Trotty, "as I was coming in, half an ounce of tea
lying somewhere on the stairs; and I'm pretty sure there was a bit of
bacon too. As I don't remember where it was exactly, I'll go myself and
try to find 'em."

With this inscrutable artifice, Toby withdrew to purchase the viands he
had spoken of, for ready money, at Mrs. Chickenstalker's; and presently
came back, pretending that he had not been able to find them, at first
in the dark.

"But here they are at last," said Trotty, setting out the tea things,
"all correct! I was pretty sure it was tea and a rasher. So it is. Meg
my pet, if you'll just make the tea, while your unworthy father toasts
the bacon, we shall be ready immediate. It's a curious circumstance,"
said Trotty, proceeding in his cookery, with the assistance of the
toasting-fork, "curious, but well known to my friends, that I never
care, myself, for rashers, nor for tea. I like to see other people enjoy
'em," said Trotty, speaking very loud to impress the fact upon his
guest, "but to me, as food, they are disagreeable."

Yet Trotty sniffed the savor of the hissing bacon--ah!--as if he liked
it; and when he poured the boiling water in the tea-pot, looked lovingly
down into the depths of that snug caldron, and suffering the fragrant
steam to curl about his nose, and wreathe his head and face in a thick
cloud. However, for all this, he neither ate nor drank, except at the
very beginning, a mere morsel for form's sake, which he appeared to eat
with infinite relish, but declared was perfectly uninteresting to him.

"Now, I'll tell you what," said Trotty after tea. "The little one, she
sleeps with Meg, I know."

"With good Meg!" cried the child, caressing her. "With Meg."

"That's right," said Trotty. "And I shouldn't wonder if she'll kiss
Meg's father, won't she? _I_'m Meg's father."

Mightily delighted Trotty was, when the child went timidly toward him,
and having kissed him, fell back upon Meg again.

Meg looked toward their guest, who leaned upon her chair, and with his
face turned from her, fondled the child's head, half hidden in her lap.

"To be sure," said Toby. "To be sure! I don't know what I am rambling on
about, to-night. My wits are wool-gathering, I think. Will Fern, you
come along with me. You're tired to death, and broken down for want of
rest. You come along with me."

The hand released from the child's hair, had fallen, trembling, into
Trotty's hand. So Trotty, talking without intermission, led him out as
tenderly and easily as if he had been a child himself.

Returning before Meg, he listened for an instant at the door of her
little chamber; an adjoining room. The child was murmuring a simple
Prayer before lying down to sleep; and when she had remembered Meg's
name, "Dearly, Dearly"--so her words ran--Trotty heard her stop and ask
for his.

It was some short time before the foolish little old fellow could
compose himself to mend the fire, and draw his chair to the warm hearth.
But when he had done so, and had trimmed the light, he took his
newspaper from his pocket and began to read. Carelessly at first, and
skimming up and down the columns; but with an earnest and a sad
attention, very soon.

For this same dreaded paper re-directed Trotty's thoughts into the
channel they had taken all that day, and which the day's events had so
marked out and shaped. His interest in the two wanderers had set him on
another course of thinking, and a happier one, for the time; but being
alone again, and reading of the crimes and violences of the people, he
relapsed into his former train.

"It's too true, all I've heard to-day," Toby muttered; "too just, too
full of proof. We're Bad!"

The Chimes took up the words so suddenly--burst out so loud, and clear,
and sonorous--that the Bells seemed to strike him in his chair.

And what was that, they said?

"Toby Veck, Toby Veck, waiting for you Toby! Toby Veck, Toby Veck,
waiting for you Toby! Come and see us, come and see us, Drag him to us,
drag him to us, Haunt and hunt him, haunt and hunt him, Break his
slumbers, break his slumbers! Toby Veck, Toby Veck, door open wide Toby,
Toby Veck, Toby Veck, door open wide Toby--" then fiercely back to their
impetuous strain again, and ringing in the very bricks and plaster on
the walls.

Toby listened. Fancy, fancy! His remorse for having run away from them
that afternoon! No, no. Nothing of the kind. Again, again, and yet a
dozen times again. "Haunt and hunt him, haunt and hunt him, Drag him to
us, drag him to us!" Deafening the whole town!

"Meg," said Trotty, softly; tapping at her door. "Do you hear anything?"

"I hear the Bells, father. Surely they're very loud to-night."

"Is she asleep?" said Toby, making an excuse for peeping in.

"So peacefully and happily! I can't leave her yet though, father. Look
how she holds my hand!"

"Meg!" whispered Trotty. "Listen to the Bells!"

She listened, with her face toward him all the time. But it underwent no
change. She didn't understand them.

Trotty withdrew, resumed his seat by the fire, and once more listened by
himself. He remained here a little time.

It was impossible to bear it; their energy was dreadful.

"If the tower-door is really open," said Toby, hastily laying aside his
apron, but never thinking of his hat, "what's to hinder me from going up
in the steeple and satisfying myself? If it's shut, I don't want any
other satisfaction. That's enough."

He was pretty certain as he slipped out quietly into the street that he
should find it shut and locked, for he knew the door well, and had so
rarely seen it open, that he couldn't reckon above three times in all.
It was a low-arched portal outside the church, in a dark nook behind a
column; and had such great iron hinges, and such a monstrous lock, that
there was more hinge and lock than door.

But what was his astonishment when, coming bare-headed to the church,
and putting his hand into this dark nook, with a certain misgiving that
it might be unexpectedly seized, and a shivering propensity to draw it
back again, he found that the door, which opened outward, actually stood
ajar!

He thought, on the first surprise, of going back; or of getting a light,
or a companion; but his courage aided him immediately, and he determined
to ascend alone.

"What have I to fear?" said Trotty. "It's a church! Besides the ringers
may be there, and have forgotten to shut the door."

So he went in, feeling his way as he went, like a blind man; for it was
very dark. And very quiet, for the Chimes were silent.

The dust from the street had blown into the recess; and lying there,
heaped up, made it so soft and velvet-like to the foot, that there was
something startling even in that. The narrow stair was so close to the
door, too, that he stumbled at the very first; and shutting the door
upon himself by striking it with his foot, and causing it to rebound
back heavily, he couldn't open it again.

This was another reason, however, for going on. Trotty groped his way,
and went on. Up, up, up, and round and round; and up, up, up, higher,
higher, higher up!

Until, ascending through the floor, and pausing with his head just
raised above its beams, he came among the Bells. It was barely possible
to make out their great shapes in the gloom; but there they were.
Shadowy, and dark, and dumb.

A heavy sense of dread and loneliness fell instantly upon him, as he
climbed into this airy nest of stone and metal. His head went round and
round. He listened and then raised a wild "Halloa!"

Halloa! was mournfully protracted by the echoes.

Giddy, confused, and out of breath, and frightened, Toby looked about
him vacantly, and sunk down in a swoon.


THIRD QUARTER.

When and how the darkness of the night-black steeple changed to shining
light; and how the solitary tower was peopled with a myriad figures;
when and how the whispered "Haunt and hunt him," breathing monotonously
through his sleep or swoon, became a voice exclaiming in the waking ears
of Trotty, "Break his slumbers;" when and how he ceased to have a
sluggish and confused idea that such things were, companioning a host of
others that were not; there are no dates or means to tell. But, awake,
and standing on his feet upon the boards where he had lately lain, he
saw this Goblin Sight.

Then and not before, did Trotty see in every Bell a bearded figure of
the bulk and stature of the Bell--incomprehensibly, a figure and the
Bell itself. Gigantic, grave, and darkly watchful of him, as he stood
rooted to the ground.

Mysterious and awful figures! Resting on nothing; poised in the night
air of the tower, with their draped and hooded heads merged in the dim
roof; motionless and shadowy. Shadowy and dark, although he saw them by
some light belonging to themselves--none else was there--each with its
muffled hand upon its goblin mouth.

He could not plunge down wildly through the opening in the floor; for,
all power of motion had deserted him. Otherwise he would have done
so--ay, would have thrown himself, head-foremost, from the steeple-top,
rather than have seen them watching him with eyes that would have waked
and watched, although the pupils had been taken out.

A blast of air--how cold and shrill!--came moaning through the tower. As
it died away, the Great Bell, or the Goblin of the Great Bell, spoke.

"What visitor is this?" it said. The voice was low and deep, and Trotty
fancied that it sounded in the other figures as well.

"I thought my name was called by the Chimes!" said Trotty, raising his
hands in an attitude of supplication. "I hardly know why I am here, or
how I came. I have listened to the Chimes these many years. They have
cheered me often."

"And you have thanked them?" said the bell.

"A thousand times!" cried Trotty.

"How?"

"I am a poor man," faltered Trotty, "and could only thank them in
words."

"And always so?" inquired the Goblin of the Bell. "Have you never done
us wrong in words?"

"No!" cried Trotty, eagerly.

"Never done us foul, and false, and wicked wrong, in words?" pursued the
Goblin of the Bell.

Trotty was about to answer "Never!" But he stopped and was confused.

"The voice of Time," said the Phantom, "cries to man, Advance! Time is
for his advancement and improvement; for his greater worth, his greater
happiness, his better life; his progress onward to that goal within its
knowledge and its view, and set there, in the period when Time and he
began. Ages of darkness, wickedness, and violence, have come and
gone--millions uncountable, have suffered, lived, and died--to point
the way before him. Who seeks to turn him back, or stay him on his
course, arrests a mighty engine which will strike the meddler dead; and
be the fiercer and the wilder, ever, for its momentary check!"

"I never did so to my knowledge, sir," said Trotty. "It was quite by
accident if I did. I wouldn't go to do it, I'm sure."

"Who puts into the mouth of Time, or of its servants," said the Goblin
of the Bell, "a cry of lamentation for days which have had their trial
and their failure, and have left deep traces of it which the blind may
see--a cry that only serves the present time, by showing men how much it
needs their help when any ears can listen to regrets for such a
past--who does this, does a wrong. And you have done that wrong to us,
the Chimes."

Trotty's first excess of fear was gone. But he had felt tenderly and
gratefully toward the Bells, as you have seen; and when he heard himself
arraigned as one who had offended them so weightily, his heart was
touched with penitence and grief.

"If you knew," said Trotty, clasping his hands earnestly--"or perhaps
you do know--if you know how often you have kept me company; how often
you have cheered me up when I've been low; how you were quite the
plaything of my little daughter Meg (almost the only one she ever had)
when first her mother died, and she and me were left alone; you won't
bear malice for a hasty word!"

"Who hears in us, the Chimes, one note bespeaking disregard, or stern
regard, of any hope, or joy, or pain, or sorrow, of the many-sorrowed
throng; who hears us make response to any creed that gauges human
passions and affections, as it gauges the amount of miserable food on
which humanity may pine and wither; does us wrong. That wrong you have
done us!" said the Bell.

"I have!" said Trotty. "Oh, forgive me!"

"Spare me," cried Trotty, falling on his knees; "for Mercy's sake!"

"Listen!" said the Shadow.

"Listen!" cried the other Shadows.

"Listen!" said a clear and child-like voice, which Trotty thought he
recognized as having heard before.

The organ sounded faintly in the church below. Swelling by degrees, the
melody ascended to the roof, and filled the choir and nave. Expanding
more and more, it rose up, up, up, up; higher, higher, higher up;
awakening agitated hearts within the burly piles of oak, the hollow
bells, the iron-bound doors, the stairs of solid stone; until the tower
walls were insufficient to contain it, and it soared into the sky.

No wonder that an old man's breast could not contain a sound so vast and
mighty. It broke from that weak prison in a rush of tears; and Trotty
put his hands before his face.

"Listen!" said the Shadow.

"Listen!" said the other Shadows.

"Listen!" said the child's voice.

A solemn strain of blended voices rose into the tower.

It was a very low and mournful strain--a Dirge--and as he listened,
Trotty heard his child among the singers.

"She is dead!" exclaimed the old man. "Meg is dead. Her spirit calls to
me. I hear it!"

"The Spirit of your child bewails the dead, and mingles with the
dead--dead hopes, dead fancies, dead imaginings of youth," returned the
Bell, "but she is living. Learn from her life, a living truth. Learn
from the creature dearest to your heart, how bad the bad are born. See
every bud and leaf plucked one by one from off the fairest stem, and
know how bare and wretched it may be. Follow her! To desperation!"

Each of the shadowy figures stretched its right arm forth, and pointed
downward.

"The Spirit of the Chimes is your companion," said the figure. "Go! It
stands behind you!"

Trotty turned, and saw--the child! The child Will Fern had carried in
the street; the child whom Meg had watched, but now, asleep!

"I carried her myself, to-night," said Trotty. "In these arms!"

"Show him what he calls himself," said the dark figures, one and all.

The tower opened at his feet. He looked down, and beheld his own form,
lying at the bottom, on the outside: crushed and motionless.

"No more a living man!" cried Trotty. "Dead!"

"Dead!" said the figures altogether.

"Gracious Heaven! And the New Year--'

"Past," said the figures.

"What!" he cried, shuddering, "I missed my way, and coming on the
outside of this tower in the dark, fell down--a year ago?"

"Nine years ago!" replied the figures.

As they gave the answer, they recalled their outstretched hands; and
where their figures had been, there the Bells were.

"What are these?" he asked his guide. "If I am not mad, what are these?"

"Spirits of the Bells. Their sound upon the air," returned the child.
"They take such shapes and occupations as the hopes and thoughts of
mortals, and the recollections they have stored up, give them."

"And you," said Trotty, wildly. "What are you?"

"Hush, hush!" returned the child. "Look here!"

In a poor, mean room; working at the same kind of embroidery, which he
had often, often, seen before her; Meg, his own dear daughter, was
presented to his view. He made no effort to imprint his kisses on her
face; he did not strive to clasp her to his loving heart; he knew that
such endearments were, for him, no more. But he held his trembling
breath, and brushed away the blinding tears, that he might look upon
her; that he might only see her.

Ah! Changed. Changed. The light of the clear eye, how dimmed. The bloom,
how faded from the cheek. Beautiful she was, as she had ever been, but
Hope, Hope, Hope, oh, where was the fresh Hope that had spoken to him
like a voice!

She looked up from her work, at a companion. Following her eyes, the old
man started back.

In the woman grown, he recognized her at a glance. In the long silken
hair, he saw the self-same curls; around the lips, the child's
expression lingering still. See! In the eyes, now turned inquiringly on
Meg, there shone the very look that scanned those features when he
brought her home!

Then what was this, beside him?

Looking with awe into its face, he saw a something reigning there: a
lofty something, undefined and indistinct, which made it hardly more
than a remembrance of that child--as yonder figure might be--yet it was
the same: the same: and wore the dress.

Hark! They were speaking!

"Meg," said Lilian, hesitating. "How often you raise your head from your
work to look at me!"

"Are my looks so altered, that they frighten you?" asked Meg.

"Nay, dear! But you smile at that yourself! Why not smile when you look
at me, Meg?"

"I do so. Do I not?" she answered: smiling on her.

"Now you do," said Lilian, "but not usually. When you think I'm busy,
and don't see you, you look so anxious and so doubtful, that I hardly
like to raise my eyes. There is little cause for smiling in this hard
and toilsome life, but you were once so cheerful."

"Am I not now?" cried Meg, speaking in a tone of strange alarm, and
rising to embrace her. "Do _I_ make our weary life more weary to you,
Lilian?"

"You have been the only thing that made it life," said Lilian, fervently
kissing her; "sometimes the only thing that made me care to live so,
Meg. Such work, such work! So many hours, so many days, so many long,
long nights of hopeless, cheerless, never-ending work--not to heap up
riches, not to live grandly or gayly, not to live upon enough, however
coarse; but to earn bare bread; to scrape together just enough to toil
upon, and want upon, and keep alive in us the consciousness of our hard
fate! Oh, Meg, Meg!" she raised her voice and twined her arms about her
as she spoke, like one in pain. "How can the cruel world go round, and
bear to look upon such lives!"

"Lilly!" said Meg, soothing her, and putting back her hair from her wet
face. "Why, Lilly! You! So pretty and so young!"

"Oh, Meg!" she interrupted, holding her at arm's-length, and looking in
her face imploringly. "The worst of all! The worst of all! Strike me
old, Meg! Wither me and shrivel me, and free me from the dreadful
thoughts that tempt me in my youth!"

Trotty turned to look upon his guide. But, the Spirit of the child had
taken flight. Was gone.

       *       *       *       *       *


FOURTH QUARTER.

Some new remembrance of the ghostly figures in the Bells; some faint
impression of the ringing of the Chimes; some giddy consciousness of
having seen the swarm of phantoms reproduced and reproduced until the
recollection of them lost itself in the confusion of their numbers; some
hurried knowledge, how conveyed to him he knew not, that more years had
passed; and Trotty, with the Spirit of the child attending him, stood
looking on at mortal company.

Fat company, rosy-cheeked company, comfortable company. They were but
two, but they were red enough for ten. They sat before a bright fire,
with a small low table between them; and unless the fragrance of hot tea
and muffins lingered longer in that room than in most others, the table
had seen service very lately. But all the cups and saucers being clean,
and in their proper places in the corner cupboard; and the brass
toasting fork hanging in its usual nook, and spreading its four idle
fingers out, as if it wanted to be measured for a glove; there remained
no other visible tokens of the meal just finished, than such as purred
and washed their whiskers in the person of the basking cat, and
glistened in the gracious, not to say the greasy, faces of her patrons.

This cosy couple (married, evidently) had made a fair division of the
fire between them, and sat looking at the glowing sparks that dropped
into the grate; now nodding off into a doze; now waking up again when
some hot fragment, larger than the rest, came rattling down, as if the
fire were coming with it.

It was in no danger of sudden extinction, however; for it gleamed not
only in the little room, and on the panes of window-glass in the door,
and on the curtain half drawn across them, but in the little shop
beyond. A little shop, quite crammed and choked with the abundance of
its stock; a perfectly voracious little shop, with a maw as
accommodating and full as any shark's. Cheese, butter, firewood, soap,
pickles, matches, bacon, table-beer, peg-tops, sweetmeats, boys' kites,
bird-seed, cold ham, birch brooms, hearth-stones, salt, vinegar,
blacking, red herrings, stationery, lard, mushroom ketchup, stay-laces,
loaves of bread, shuttlecocks, eggs, and slate-pencils; everything was
fish that came to the net of this greedy little shop, and all articles
were in its net.

Glancing at such of these items as were visible in the shining of the
blaze, and the less cheerful radiance of two smoky lamps which burnt but
dimly in the shop itself, as though its plethora sat heavy on their
lungs; and glancing, then, at one of the two faces by the parlor-fire,
Trotty had small difficulty in recognizing in the stout old lady, Mrs.
Chickenstalker: always inclined to corpulency, even in the days when he
had known her as established in the general line, and having a small
balance against him in her books.

The features of her companion were less easy to him. The great broad
chin, with creases in it large enough to hide a finger in; the
astonished eyes, that seemed to expostulate with themselves for sinking
deeper and deeper into the yielding fat of the soft face; the nose
afflicted with that disordered action of its functions which is
generally termed The Snuffles; the short thick throat and laboring
chest, with other beauties of the like description, though calculated to
impress the memory, Trotty could at first allot to nobody he had ever
known: and yet he had some recollection of them too. At length, in Mrs.
Chickenstalker's partner in the general line, and in the crooked and
eccentric line of life, he recognized the former porter of Sir Joseph
Bowley; an apoplectic innocent, who had connected himself in Trotty's
mind with Mrs. Chickenstalker years ago, by giving him admission to the
mansion where he had confessed his obligations to that lady, and drawn
on his unlucky head such grave reproach.

Trotty had little interest in a change like this, after the changes he
had seen; but association is very strong sometimes; and he looked
involuntarily behind the parlor-door, where the accounts of credit
customers were usually kept in chalk. There was no record of his name.
Some names were there, but they were strange to him, and infinitely
fewer than of old; from which he argued that the porter was an advocate
of ready money transactions, and on coming into the business had looked
pretty sharp after the Chickenstalker defaulters.

So desolate was Trotty, and so mournful for the youth and promise of his
blighted child, that it was a sorrow to him, even to have no place in
Mrs. Chickenstalker's ledger.

"What sort of a night is it, Anne?" inquired the former porter of Sir
Joseph Bowley, stretching out his legs before the fire, and rubbing as
much of them as his short arms could reach; with an air that added,
"Here I am if it's bad, and I don't want to go out if it's good."

"Hard weather indeed," returned his wife, shaking her head.

"Ay, ay! Years," said Mr. Tugby, "are like Christians in that respect.
Some of 'em die hard; some of 'em die easy. This one hasn't many days to
run, and is making a fight for it. I like him all the better. There's a
customer, my love!"

Attentive to the rattling door, Mrs. Tugby had already risen.

"Now, then!" said that lady, passing out into the little shop. "What's
wanted? Oh! I beg your pardon, sir, I'm sure. I didn't think it was
you."

She made this apology to a gentleman in black, who, with his wristbands
tucked up, and his hat cocked loungingly on one side, and his hand in
his pocket, sat down astride on the table-beer barrel, and nodded in
return.

"This is a bad business up-stairs, Mrs. Tugby," said the gentleman.
"The man can't live."

"Not the back-attic can't!" cried Tugby, coming out into the shop to
join the conference.

"The back-attic, Mr. Tugby," said the gentleman, "is coming down-stairs
fast, and will be below the basement very soon."

Looking by turns at Tugby and his wife, he sounded the barrel with his
knuckles for the depth of beer, and having found it, played a tune upon
the empty part.

"The back-attic, Mr. Tugby," said the gentleman: Tugby having stood in
silent consternation for some time; "is Going."

"Then," said Tugby, turning to his wife, "he must Go, you know, before
he's Gone."

"I don't think you can move him," said the gentleman, shaking his head.
"I wouldn't take the responsibility of saying it could be done, myself.
You had better leave him where he is. He can't live long."

"It's the only subject," said Tugby, bringing the butter-scale down upon
the counter with a crash, by weighing his fist on it, "that we've ever
had a word upon; she and me; and look what it comes to! He's going to
die here, after all. Going to die upon the premises. Going to die in our
house!"

"And where should he have died, Tugby?" cried his wife.

"In the workhouse," he returned. "What are workhouses made for?"

"Not for that!" said Mrs. Tugby, with great energy. "Not for that!
Neither did I marry you for that. Don't think it, Tugby. I won't have
it. I won't allow it. I'd be separated first, and never see your face
again. When my widow's name stood over that door, as it did for many,
many years: the house being known as Mrs. Chickenstalker's far and
wide, and never known but to its honest credit and its good report: when
my widow's name stood over that door, Tugby, I knew him as a handsome,
steady, manly, independent youth; I knew her as the sweetest looking,
sweetest tempered girl, eyes ever saw; I knew her father (poor old
creetur, he fell down from the steeple walking in his sleep, and killed
himself), for the simplest, hardest working, childest-hearted man, that
ever drew the breath of life; and when I turn them out of house and
home, may angels turn me out of heaven. As they would! And serve me
right!"

Her old face, which had been a plump and dimpled one before the changes
which had come to pass, seemed to shine out of her as she said these
words; and when she dried her eyes, and shook her head and her
handkerchief at Tugby, with an expression of firmness which it was quite
clear was not to be easily resisted, Trotty said, "Bless her! Bless
her!"

Then he listened, with a panting heart, for what should follow. Knowing
nothing yet, but that they spoke of Meg.

The gentleman upon the table-beer cask, who appeared to be some
authorized medical attendant upon the poor, was far too well accustomed,
evidently, to little differences of opinion between man and wife, to
interpose any remark in this instance. He sat softly whistling, and
turning little drops of beer out of the tap upon the ground, until there
was a perfect calm: when he raised his head and said to Mrs. Tugby, late
Chickenstalker:

"There's something interesting about the woman, even now. How did she
come to marry him?"

"Why, that," said Mrs. Tugby, taking a seat near him, "is not the least
cruel part of her story, sir. You see they kept company, she and
Richard, many years ago. When they were a young and beautiful couple,
everything was settled, and they were to have been married on a New
Year's Day. But, somehow, Richard got it into his head, through what the
gentleman told him, that he might do better, and that he'd soon repent
it, and that she wasn't good enough for him, and that a young man of
spirit had no business to be married. And the gentleman frightened her,
and made her melancholy, and timid of his deserting her, and of her
children coming to the gallows, and of its being wicked to be man and
wife, and a good deal more of it. And in short, they lingered and
lingered, and their trust in one another was broken, and so at last was
the match. But the fault was his. She would have married him, sir,
joyfully. I've seen her heart swell, many times afterwards, when he
passed her in a proud and careless way; and never did a woman grieve
more truly for a man, than she for Richard when he first went wrong."

"Oh! he went wrong, did he?" said the gentleman, pulling out the
vent-peg of the table-beer, and trying to peep down into the barrel
through the hole.

"Well, sir, I don't know that he rightly understood himself, you see. I
think his mind was troubled by their having broke with one another; and
that but for being ashamed before the gentlemen, and perhaps for being
uncertain too, how she might take it, he'd have gone through any
suffering or trial to have had Meg's promise, and Meg's hand again.
That's my belief. He never said so; more's the pity! He took to
drinking, idling, bad companions: all the fine resources that were to be
so much better for him than the Home he might have had. He lost his
looks, his character, his health, his strength, his friends, his work:
everything!"

"He didn't lose everything, Mrs. Tugby," returned the gentleman,
"because he gained a wife; and I want to know how he gained her."

"I'm coming to it, sir, in a moment. This went on for years and years;
he sinking lower and lower; she enduring, poor thing, miseries enough to
wear her life away. At last he was so cast down, and cast out, that no
one would employ or notice him; and doors were shut upon him, go where
he would. Applying from place to place, and door to door; and coming for
the hundredth time to one gentleman, who had often and often tried him
(he was a good workman to the very end); that gentleman, who knew his
history, said, 'I believe you are incorrigible; there's only one person
in the world who has a chance of reclaiming you; ask me to trust you no
more, until she tries to do it.' Something like that, in his anger and
vexation."

"Ah!" said the gentleman. "Well?"

"Well, sir, he went to her, and kneeled to her; said it was so; said it
ever had been so; and made a prayer to her to save him."

"And she?--Don't distress yourself, Mrs. Tugby."

"She came to me that night to ask me about living here. 'What he was
once to me,' she said, 'is buried in a grave, side by side with what I
was to him. But I have thought of this; and I will make the trial. In
the hope of saving him; for the love of the light-hearted girl (you
remember her) who was to have been married on a New Year's Day; and for
the love of her Richard.' And he said he had come to her from Lilian,
and Lilian had trusted to him, and she never could forget that. So they
were married; and when they came home here, and I saw them, I hoped that
such prophecies as parted them when they were young, may not often
fulfill themselves as they did in this case, or I wouldn't be the
makers of them for a Mine of Gold."

The gentleman got off the cask, and stretched himself, observing:

"I suppose he used her ill, as soon as they were married?"

"I don't think he ever did that," said Mrs. Tugby, shaking her head and
wiping her eyes. "He went on better for a short time; but, his habits
were too old and strong to be got rid of; he soon fell back a little;
and was falling fast back, when his illness came so strong upon him. I
think he has always felt for her. I am sure he has. I've seen him in his
crying fits and tremblings, try to kiss her hand; and I have heard him
call her 'Meg,' and say it was her nineteenth birthday. There he has
been lying, now, these weeks and months. Between him and her baby, she
has not been able to do her old work; and by not being able to be
regular, she has lost it, even if she could have done it. How they have
lived, I hardly know!"

"_I_ know," muttered Mr. Tugby, looking at the till, and round the shop,
and at his wife; and rolling his head with immense intelligence.

He was interrupted by a cry--a sound of lamentation--from the upper
story of the house. The gentleman moved hurriedly to the door.

"My friend," he said, looking back, "you needn't discuss whether he
shall be removed or not. He has spared you that trouble, I believe."

Saying so, he ran up-stairs, followed by Mrs. Tugby; while Mr. Tugby
panted and grumbled after them at leisure: being rendered more than
commonly short-winded by the weight of the till, in which there had been
an inconvenient quantity of copper. Trotty, with the child beside him,
floated up the staircase like mere air.

"Follow her! Follow her! Follow her!" He heard the ghostly voices in
the Bells repeat their words as he ascended. "Learn it, from the
creature dearest to your heart!"

It was over. It was over. And this was she, her father's pride and joy!
This haggard, wretched woman, weeping by the bed, if it deserved that
name, and pressing to her breast, and hanging down her head upon, an
infant? Who can tell how spare, how sickly, and how poor an infant? Who
can tell how dear?

"Thank God!" cried Trotty, holding up his folded hands. "O, God be
thanked! She loves her child!"

Again Trotty heard the voices, saying, "Follow her!" He turned toward
his guide, and saw it rising from him, passing through the air. "Follow
her!" it said. And vanished.

He hovered round her; sat down at her feet; looked up into her face for
one trace of her old self; listened for one note of her old pleasant
voice. He flitted round the child: so wan, so prematurely old, so
dreadful in its gravity, so plaintive in its feeble, mournful, miserable
wail. He almost worshiped it. He clung to it as her only safeguard; as
the last unbroken link that bound her to endurance. He set his father's
hope and trust on the frail baby; watched her every look upon it as she
held it in her arms; and cried a thousand times, "She loves it! God be
thanked, she loves it!"

He saw the woman tend her in the night; return to her when her grudging
husband was asleep, and all was still; encourage her, shed tears with
her, set nourishment before her. He saw the day come, and the night
again; the day, the night; the time go by; the house of death relieved
of death; the room left to herself and to the child; he heard it moan
and cry; he saw it harass her, and tire her out, and when she slumbered
in exhaustion, drag her back to consciousness, and hold her with its
little hands upon the rack; but she was constant to it, gentle with it,
patient with it. Patient! Was its loving mother in her inmost heart and
soul, and had its Being knitted up with hers as when she carried it
unborn.

All this time, she was in want: languishing away, in dire and pining
want. With the baby in her arms, she wandered here and there in quest of
occupation; and with its thin face lying in her lap, and looking up in
hers, did any work for any wretched sum: a day and night of labor for as
many farthings as there were figures on the dial. If she had quarreled
with it; if she had neglected it; if she had looked upon it with a
moment's hate! if, in the frenzy of an instant, she had struck it! No!
His comfort was, She loved it always.

She told no one of her extremity, and wandered abroad in the day lest
she should be questioned by her only friend: for any help she received
from her hands, occasioned fresh disputes between the good woman and her
husband; and it was new bitterness to be the daily cause of strife and
discord, where she owed so much.

She loved it still. She loved it more and more. But a change fell on the
aspect of her love.

One night she was singing faintly to it in its sleep and walking to and
fro to hush it, when her door was softly opened, and a man looked in.

"For the last time," he said.

"William Fern!"

"For the last time."

He listened like a man pursued: and spoke in whispers.

"Margaret, my race is nearly run, I couldn't finish it, without a
parting word with you. Without one grateful word."

"What have you done?" she asked: regarding him with terror.

He looked at her but gave no answer.

After a short silence, he made a gesture with his hand, as if he set her
question by; as if he brushed it aside; and said:

"It's long ago, Margaret, now; but that night is as fresh in my memory
as ever 'twas. We little thought then," he added, looking round, "that
we should ever meet like this. Your child, Margaret? Let me have it in
my arms. Let me hold your child."

He put his hat upon the floor, and took it. And he trembled as he took
it, from head to foot.

"Is it a girl?"

"Yes."

He put his hand before its little face.

"See how weak I'm grown, Margaret, when I want the courage to look at
it! Let her be, a moment. I won't hurt her. It's long ago, but--What's
her name?"

"Margaret," she answered quickly.

"I'm glad of that," he said. "I'm glad of that!"

He seemed to breathe more freely; and after pausing for an instant, took
away his hand, and looked upon the infant's face. But covered it again,
immediately.

"Margaret!" he said; and gave her back the child. "It's Lilian's."

"Lilian's!"

"I held the same face in my arms when Lilian's mother died and left
her."

"When Lilian's mother died and left her!" she repeated, wildly.

"How shrill you speak! Why do you fix your eyes upon me so? Margaret!"

She sunk down in a chair, and pressed the infant to her breast, and wept
over it. Sometimes, she released it from her embrace, to look anxiously
in its face: then strained it to her bosom again. At those times, when
she gazed upon it, then it was that something fierce and terrible began
to mingle with her love. Then it was that her old father quailed.

"Follow her!" was sounded through the house. "Learn it, from the
creature dearest to your heart!"

"Margaret," said Fern, bending over her, and kissing her upon the brow:
"I thank you for the last time. Good night. Good bye! Put your hand in
mine, and tell me you'll forget me from this hour, and try to think the
end of me was here."

She called to him; but he was gone. She sat down stupefied, until her
infant roused her to a sense of hunger, cold, and darkness. She paced
the room with it the livelong night, hushing it and soothing it. She
said at intervals, "Like Lilian when her mother died and left her!" Why
was her step so quick, her eyes so wild, her love so fierce and
terrible, whenever she repeated those words?

"But, it is Love," said Trotty. "It is Love. She'll never cease to love
it. My poor Meg!"

She dressed the child next morning with unusual care--ah, vain
expenditure of care upon such squalid robes!--and once more tried to
find some means of life. It was the last day of the Old Year. She tried
till night, and never broke her fast. She tried in vain.

She mingled with an abject crowd, who tarried in the snow, until it
pleased some officer appointed to dispense the public charity (the
lawful charity; not that once preached upon a Mount), to call them in,
and question them, and say to this one, "Go to such a place," to that
one, "Come next week;" to make a foot-ball of another wretch, and pass
him here and there, from hand to hand, from house to house, until he
wearied and lay down to die; or started up and robbed, and so became a
higher sort of criminal, whose claims allowed of no delay. Here, too,
she failed.

She loved her child, and wished to have it lying on her breast. And that
was quite enough.

It was night: a bleak, dark, cutting night: when pressing the child
close to her for warmth, she arrived outside the house she called her
home. She was so faint and giddy, that she saw no one standing in the
doorway until she was close upon it, and about to enter. Then, she
recognized the master of the house, who had so disposed himself--with
his person it was not difficult--as to fill up the whole entry.

"Oh!" he said softly. "You have come back?"

She looked at the child and shook her head.

"Don't you think you have lived here long enough without paying any
rent? Don't you think that, without any money, you've been a pretty
constant customer at this shop, now?" said Mr. Tugby.

She repeated the same mute appeal.

"Suppose you try and deal somewhere else," he said. "And suppose you
provide yourself with another lodging. Come! Don't you think you could
manage it?"

She said, in a low voice, that it was very late. To-morrow.

"Now I see what you want," said Tugby; "and what you mean. You know
there are two parties in this house about you, and you delight in
setting them by the ears. I don't want any quarrels; I'm speaking softly
to avoid a quarrel; but if you don't go away, I'll speak out loud, and
you shall cause words loud enough to please you. But you shan't come in,
that I am determined."

She put her hair back with her hand, and looked in a sudden manner at
the sky, and the dark lowering distance.

"This is the last night of an Old Year, and I won't carry ill-blood and
quarrelings and disturbances into a New One, to please you nor anybody
else," said Tugby, who was quite a retail Friend and Father. "I wonder
you an't ashamed of yourself, to carry such practices into a New Year.
If you haven't any business in the world, but to be always giving way,
and always making disturbances between man and wife, you'd be better out
of it. Go along with you!"

"Follow her! To desperation!"

Again the old man heard the voices. Looking up, he saw the figures
hovering in the air, and pointing where she went, down the dark street.

"She loves it!" he exclaimed in agonized entreaty for her. "Chimes! she
loves it still!"

"Follow her!" The shadows swept upon the track she had taken like a
cloud.

Oh, for something to awaken her! For any sight or sound, or scent, to
call up tender recollections in a brain on fire! For any gentle image of
the Past, to rise up before her!

"I was her father! I was her father!" cried the old man, stretching out
his hands to the dark shadows flying on above. "Have mercy on her, and
on me! Where does she go? Turn her back! I was her father!"

But, they only pointed to her, as she hurried on; "To desperation! Learn
it from the creature dearest to your heart!"

A hundred voices echoed it. The air was made of breath expended in those
words. He seemed to take them in, at every gasp he drew. They were
everywhere, and not to be escaped. And still she hurried on; the same
light in her eyes.

All at once she stopped.

"Now, turn her back!" exclaimed the old man, tearing his white hair. "My
child! Meg! Turn her back! Great Father, turn her back!"

In her own scanty shawl, she wrapped the baby warm. With her fevered
hands, she smoothed its limbs, composed its face, arranged its mean
attire. In her wasted arms she folded it, as though she never would
resign it more. And with her dry lips, kissed it in a final pang, and
last long agony of Love.

Putting its tiny hand up to her neck, and holding it there, within her
dress, next to her distracted heart, she set its sleeping face against
her: closely, steadily against her: and sped onward to the river.

To the rolling River, swift and dim, where Winter Night sat brooding
like the last dark thoughts of many who had sought a refuge there before
her. Where scattered lights upon the banks gleamed sullen, red and dull,
as torches that were burning there to show the way to Death. Where no
abode of living people cast its shadow, on the deep, impenetrable,
melancholy shade.

To the River! To that portal of Eternity, her desperate footsteps tended
with the swiftness of its rapid waters running to the sea. He tried to
touch her as she passed him, going down to its dark level; but, the wild
distempered form, the fierce and terrible love, the desperation that had
left all human check or hold behind, swept by him like the wind.

He followed her. She paused a moment on the brink, before the dreadful
plunge. He fell down on his knees, and in a shriek addressed the figures
in the Bells now hovering above them.

"Have mercy on her!" he exclaimed, "as one in whom this dreadful crime
has sprung from Love perverted; from the strongest, deepest Love we
fallen creatures know! Think what her misery must have been, when such
seed bears such fruit. Heaven meant her to be good. There is no loving
mother on the earth who might not come to this, if such a life had gone
before. Oh, have mercy on my child, who, even at this pass, means mercy
to her own, and dies herself, and perils her immortal soul, to save
it!"

She was in his arms. He held her now. His strength was like a giant's.

He might have said more; but the Bells, the old familiar Bells, his own
dear, constant, steady friends, the Chimes, began to ring the joy-peals
for a New Year; so lustily, so merrily, so happily, so gayly, that he
leapt upon his feet, and broke the spell that bound him.

       *       *       *       *       *

"And whatever you do, father," said Meg, "don't eat tripe again without
asking some doctor whether it's likely to agree with you; for how you
_have_ been going on, Good gracious!"

She was working with her needle at the little table by the fire,
dressing her simple gown with ribbons for her wedding. So quietly happy,
so blooming and youthful, so full of beautiful promise, that he uttered
a great cry as if it were an Angel in his house; then flew to clasp her
in his arms.

But he caught his feet in the newspaper, which had fallen on the hearth,
and somebody came rushing in between them.

"No!" cried the voice of this same somebody; a generous and jolly voice
it was. "Not even you. Not even you. The first kiss of Meg in the New
Year is mine. Mine! I have been waiting outside the house this hour to
hear the Bells and claim it. Meg, my precious prize, a happy year! A
life of happy years, my darling wife!"

And Richard smothered her with kisses.

You never in all your life saw anything like Trotty after this. I don't
care where you have lived or what you have seen, you never in all your
life saw anything at all approaching him! He sat down in his chair and
beat his knees and cried; he sat down in his chair and beat his knees
and laughed; he sat down in his chair and beat his knees and laughed and
cried together; he got out of his chair and hugged Meg; he got out of
his chair and hugged Richard; he got out of his chair and hugged them
both at once; he kept running up to Meg and squeezing her fresh face
between his hands and kissing it, going from her backward not to lose
sight of it, and running up again like a figure in a magic lantern; and
whatever he did, he was constantly sitting himself down in this chair,
and never stopping in it for one single moment, being--that's the
truth--beside himself with joy.

"And to-morrow's your wedding-day, my pet!" cried Trotty. "Your real,
happy wedding-day!"

"To-day!" cried Richard, shaking hands with him. "To-day. The Chimes are
ringing in the New Year. Hear them!"

They WERE ringing! Bless their sturdy hearts, they WERE ringing! Great
Bells as they were; melodious, deep-mouthed, noble Bells; cast in no
common metal; made by no common founder; when had they ever chimed like
that before?

"But to-day, my pet," said Trotty. "You and Richard had some words
to-day."

"Because he's such a bad fellow, father," said Meg. "An't you, Richard?
Such a headstrong, violent man! He'd have made no more of speaking his
mind to that great Alderman, and putting _him_ down I don't know where,
than he would of--"

"--Kissing Meg," suggested Richard. Doing it, too.

"No. Not a bit more," said Meg. "But I wouldn't let him, father. Where
would have been the use?"

"Richard, my boy!" cried Trotty. "You was turned up Trumps originally,
and Trumps you must be until you die! But you were crying by the fire
to-night, my pet, when I came home. Why did you cry by the fire?"

"I was thinking of the years we've passed together, father. Only that.
And thinking you might miss me, and be lonely."

Trotty was backing off to that extraordinary chair again, when the
child, who had been awakened by the noise, came running in, half
dressed.

"Why, here she is!" cried Trotty catching her up. "Here's little Lilian!
Ha, ha, ha! Here we are and here we go! O, here we are and here we go
again! And here we are and here we go! And Uncle Will, too!" Stopping in
his trot to greet him heartily. "O, Uncle Will, the vision that I've had
to-night, through lodging you! O, Uncle Will, the obligations that
you've laid me under by your coming, my good friend!"

Before Will Fern could make the least reply, a band of music burst into
the room, attended by a flock of neighbors, screaming: "A Happy New
Year, Meg!" "A Happy Wedding!" "Many of 'em!" and other fragmentary good
wishes of that sort. The Drum (who was a private friend of Trotty's)
then stepped forward and said:

"Trotty Veck, my boy! It's got about that your daughter is going to be
married to-morrow. There an't a soul that knows you that don't wish you
well, or that knows her and don't wish her well. Or that knows you both
and don't wish you both all the happiness the New Year can bring. And
here we are, to play it in accordingly."

"What a happiness it is, I'm sure," said Trotty, "to be so esteemed. How
kind and neighborly you are! It's all along of my dear daughter. She
deserves it."

At this moment a combination of prodigious sounds was heard outside, and
a good-humored, comely woman of some fifty years of age, or thereabouts,
came running in, closely followed by the marrow-bones and cleavers and
the bells--not _the_ Bells, but a portable collection on a frame.

Trotty said: "It's Mrs. Chickenstalker!" And sat down and beat his knees
again.

"Married, and not tell me, Meg!" cried the good woman. "Never! I
couldn't rest on the last night of the Old Year without coming to wish
you joy. I couldn't have done it, Meg. Not if I had been bed-ridden. So
here I am."

"Mrs. Tugby," said Trotty, who had been going round and round her in an
ecstasy--"I _should_ say Chickenstalker--bless your heart and soul! A
happy New Year, and many of 'em! Mrs. Tugby," said Trotty, when he had
saluted her--"I _should_ say Chickenstalker--this is William Fern and
Lilian."

The worthy dame, to his surprise, turned very pale and very red.

"Not Lilian Fern, whose mother died in Dorsetshire?" said she.

Her uncle answered "Yes," and meeting hastily they exchanged some
hurried words together, of which the upshot was that Mrs. Chickenstalker
shook him by both hands, saluted Trotty on his cheek again of her own
free will, and took the child to her capacious breast.

"Will Fern," said Trotty, pulling on his right-hand muffler. "Not the
friend that you was hoping to find?"

"Ay," returned Will, putting a hand on each of Trotty's shoulders. "And
like to prove a'most as good a friend, if that can be, as one I found."

"O!" said Trotty. "Please to play up there. Will you have the goodness?"

Had Trotty dreamed? Or are his joys and sorrows, and the actors in them,
but a dream; himself a dream; the teller of this tale a dreamer, waking
but now? If it be so, O listener, dear to him in all his visions, try to
bear in mind the stern realities from which these shadows come; and in
your sphere--none is too wide and none too limited for such an
end--endeavor to correct, improve and soften them. So may the New Year
be a happy one to you, happy to many more whose happiness depends on
you! So may each year be happier than the last, and not the meanest of
our brethren or sisterhood debarred their rightful share in what our
great Creator formed them to enjoy.




BILLY'S SANTA CLAUS EXPERIENCE.

BY CORNELIA REDMOND.


Of course I don't believe in any such person as Santa Claus, but Tommy
does. Tommy is my little brother, aged six. Last Christmas I thought I'd
make some fun for the young one by playing Santa Claus, but as always
happens when I try to amuse anybody I jes' got myself into trouble.

I went to bed pretty early on Christmas Eve so as to give my parents a
chance to get the presents out of the closet in mamma's room, where they
had been locked up since they were bought. I kep' my clo'es on except my
shoes, and put my nightgown over them so as I'd look white if any of
them came near me. Then I waited, pinchin' myself to keep awake. After a
while papa came into the room with a lot of things that he dumped on
Tommy's bed. Then mamma came in and put some things on mine and in our
two stockings that were hung up by the chimney. Then they both went out
very quiet, and soon all the lights went out too.

I kep' on pinchin' myself and waitin' for a time, and then when I was
sure that everybody was asleep I got up. The first thing I went into was
my sister's room and got her white fur rug that mamma gave her on her
birthday, and her sealskin cape that was hanging on the closet door. I
tied the cape on my head with shoestrings and it made a good big cap.
Then I put the fur rug around me and pinned it with big safety pins what
I found on Tommy's garters. Then I got mamma's new scrap-basket, trimmed
with roses, what Mrs. Simmons 'broidered for the church fair and piled
all of the kid's toys into it. I fastened it to my back with papa's
suspenders, and then I started for the roof.

I hurt my fingers some opening the scuttle, but kept right on. It was
snowing hard and I stood and let myself get pretty well covered with
flakes. Then I crawled over to the chimney that went down into our room
and climbed up on top of it. I had brought my bicycle lantern with me
and I lighted it so as Tommy could see me when I came down the chimney
into the room.

There did not seem to be any places inside the chimney where I could
hold on by my feet, but the ceiling in our room was not very high and I
had often jumped most as far, so I jes' let her go, and I suppose I went
down. Anyway, I did not know about anything for a long time. Then I woke
up all in the dark with my head feeling queer, and when I tried to turn
over in bed I found I wasn't in bed at all, and then my arms and legs
began to hurt terrible, mostly one arm that was doubled up. I tried to
get up but I couldn't because my bones hurt so and I was terrible cold
and there was nothing to stand on. I was jes' stuck. Then I began to
cry, and pretty soon I heard mamma's voice saying to papa:

"Those must be sparrers that are making that noise in the chimney. Jes'
touch a match to the wood in the boys' fireplace."

I heard papa strike a light and then the wood began to crackle. Then, by
jinks! it began to get hot and smoky and I screamed:

"Help! Murder! Put out that fire lest you want to burn me up!"

Then I heard papa stamping on the wood and mamma calling out:

"Where's Billy? Where is my chile?"

Next Tommy woke up and began to cry and everything was terrible,
specially the pains all over me. Then papa called out very stern:

"William, if you are in that chimney come down at once!" and I
answered, cryin', that I would if I could, but I was stuck and couldn't.

Then I heard papa gettin' dressed, and pretty soon he and John from the
stable went up on the roof and let down ropes what I put around me and
they hauled me up.

It was jes' daylight and I was all black and sooty and scratched and my
arm was broken.

Everybody scolded me excep' mamma. I had spoiled my sister's white rug
and broken all of Tommy's toys, and the snow what went in through the
scuttle melted and marked the parlor ceiling, besides I guess it cost
papa a good deal to get my arm mended. Nobody would believe that I had
jes' meant to make some fun for Tommy, and my arm and all my bruised
places hurt me awful for a long time. If I live to be a million I am
never goin' to play Santa Claus ag'in.




CHRISTMAS IN POGANUC.

BY HARRIET BEECHER STOWE.


THE FIRST CHRISTMAS.

Can any of us look back to the earlier days of our mortal pilgrimage and
remember the helpless sense of desolation and loneliness caused by being
forced to go off to the stillness and darkness of a solitary bed far
from all the beloved voices and employments and sights of life? Can we
remember lying, hearing distant voices, and laughs of more fortunate,
older people and the opening and shutting of distant doors, that told of
scenes of animation and interest from which we were excluded? How
doleful sounded the tick of the clock, and how dismal was the darkness
as sunshine faded from the window, leaving only a square of dusky
dimness in place of daylight!

All who remember these will sympathize with Dolly, who was hustled off
to bed by Nabby the minute supper was over, that she might have the
decks clear for action.

"Now be a good girl; shut your eyes, and say your prayers, and go right
to sleep," had been Nabby's parting injunction as she went out, closing
the door after her.

The little head sunk into the pillow, and Dolly recited her usual
liturgy of "Our Father who art in heaven," and "I pray God to bless my
dear father and mother and all my dear friends and relations, and make
me a good girl," and ending with


     "'Now I lay me down to sleep.'"


But sleep she could not. The wide, bright, wistful blue eyes lay
shining like two stars toward the fading light in the window, and the
little ears were strained to catch every sound. She heard the shouts of
Tom and Bill and the loud barking of Spring as they swept out of the
door; and the sound went to her heart. Spring--her faithful attendant,
the most loving and sympathetic of dogs, her friend and confidential
counselor in many a solitary ramble--Spring had gone with the boys to
see the sight, and left her alone. She began to pity herself and cry
softly on her pillow. For a while she could hear Nabby's energetic
movements below, washing up dishes, putting back chairs, and giving
energetic thumps and bangs here and there, as her way was of producing
order. But by and by that was all over, and she heard the loud shutting
of the kitchen door and Nabby's voice chatting with her attendant as she
went off to the scene of gaiety.

In those simple, innocent days in New England villages nobody thought of
locking house doors at night. There was in those times no idea either of
tramps or burglars, and many a night in summer had Dolly lain awake and
heard the voices of tree-toads and whip-poor-wills mingling with the
whisper of leaves and the swaying of elm boughs, while the great outside
door of the house lay broad open in the moonlight. But then this was
when everybody was in the house and asleep, when the door of her
parents' room stood open on the front hall, and she knew she could run
to the paternal bed in a minute for protection. Now, however, she knew
the house was empty. Everybody had gone out of it; and there is
something fearful to a little lonely body in the possibilities of a
great, empty house. She got up and opened her door, and the "tick-tock"
of the old kitchen clock for a moment seemed like company; but pretty
soon its ticking began to strike louder and louder with a nervous
insistency on her ear, till the nerves quivered and vibrated, and she
couldn't go to sleep. She lay and listened to all the noises outside. It
was a still, clear, freezing night, when the least sound clinked with a
metallic resonance. She heard the runners of sleighs squeaking and
crunching over the frozen road, and the lively jingle of bells. They
would come nearer, nearer, pass by the house, and go off in the
distance. Those were the happy folks going to see the gold star and the
Christmas greens in the church. The gold star, the Christmas greens, had
all the more attraction from their vagueness. Dolly was a fanciful
little creature, and the clear air and romantic scenery of a mountain
town had fed her imagination. Stories she had never read, except in the
Bible and the Pilgrim's Progress, but her very soul had vibrated with
the descriptions of the celestial city--something vague, bright,
glorious, lying beyond some dark river; and Nabby's rude account of what
was going on in the church suggested those images.

Finally a bright thought popped into her little head. She could see the
church from the front windows of the house; she would go there and look.
In haste she sprang out of bed and dressed herself. It was sharp and
freezing in the fireless chamber, but Dolly's blood had a racing,
healthy tingle to it; she didn't mind cold. She wrapped her cloak around
her and tied on her hood and ran to the front windows. There it was, to
be sure--the little church with its sharp-pointed windows, every pane of
which was sending streams of light across the glittering snow. There was
a crowd around the door, and men and boys looking in at the windows.
Dolly's soul was fired. But the elm boughs a little obstructed her
vision; she thought she would go down and look at it from the yard. So
down-stairs she ran, but as she opened the door the sound of the chant
rolled out into the darkness with sweet and solemn cadence:

"_Glory be to God on high; and on earth peace, good will toward men._"

Dolly's soul was all aglow--her nerves tingled and vibrated; she thought
of the bells ringing in the celestial city; she could no longer contain
herself, but faster and faster the little hooded form scudded across the
snowy plain and pushed in among the dark cluster of spectators at the
door. All made way for the child, and in a moment, whether in the body
or out she could not tell, Dolly was sitting in a little nook under a
bower of spruce, gazing at the star and listening to the voices:

"_We praise Thee, we bless Thee, we worship Thee, we glorify Thee, we
give thanks to Thee for Thy great glory, O Lord God, Heavenly King, God,
the Father Almighty._"

Her heart throbbed and beat; she trembled with a strange happiness and
sat as one entranced till the music was over. Then came reading, the
rustle and murmur of people kneeling, and then they all rose and there
was the solemn buzz of voices repeating the Creed with a curious lulling
sound to her ear. There was old Mr. Danforth with his spectacles on,
reading with a pompous tone, as if to witness a good confession for the
church; and there were Squire Lewis and old Ma'am Lewis; and there was
one place where they all bowed their heads and all the ladies made
courtesies--all of which entertained her mightily.

When the sermon began Dolly got fast asleep, and slept as quietly as a
pet lamb in a meadow, lying in a little warm roll back under the shadows
of the spruces. She was so tired and so sound asleep that she did not
wake when the service ended, lying serenely curled up, and having
perhaps pleasant dreams. She might have had the fortunes of little
Goody Two-Shoes, whose history was detailed in one of the few children's
books then printed, had not two friends united to find her out.

Spring, who had got into the slip with the boys, and been an equally
attentive and edified listener, after service began a tour of
investigation, dog-fashion, with his nose; for how could a minister's
dog form a suitable judgment of any new procedure if he was repressed
from the use of his own leading faculty? So, Spring went round the
church conscientiously, smelling at pew doors, smelling of the greens,
smelling at the heels of gentlemen and ladies, till he came near the
door of the church, when he suddenly smelt something which called for
immediate attention, and he made a side dart into the thicket where
Dolly was sleeping, and began licking her face and hands and pulling her
dress, giving short barks occasionally, as if to say, "Come, Dolly, wake
up!" At the same instant Hiel, who had seen her from the gallery, came
down just as the little one was sitting up with a dazed, bewildered air.

"Why, Dolly, how came you out o' bed this time o' night? Don't ye know
the nine o'clock bell's jest rung?"

Dolly knew Hiel well enough--what child in the village did not? She
reached up her little hands, saying in an apologetic fashion:

"They were all gone away, and I was so lonesome!"

Hiel took her up in his long arms and carried her home, and was just
entering the house door with her as the sleigh drove up with Parson
Cushing and his wife.

"Wal, Parson, your folks has all ben to the 'lumination--Nabby and Bill
and Tom and Dolly here; found her all rolled up in a heap like a rabbit
under the cedars."

"Why, Dolly Cushing!" exclaimed her mother. "What upon earth got you
out of bed this time of night? You'll catch your death o' cold."

"I was all alone," said Dolly, with a piteous bleat.

"Oh, there, there, wife; don't say a word," put in the parson. "Get her
off to bed. Never mind, Dolly, don't you cry;" for Parson Cushing was a
soft-hearted gentleman and couldn't bear the sight of Dolly's quivering
under lip. So Dolly told her little story, how she had been promised a
sugar dog by Nabby if she'd be a good girl and go to sleep, and how she
couldn't go to sleep, and how she just went down to look from the yard,
and how the music drew her right over.

"There, there," said Parson Cushing, "go to bed, Dolly; and if Nabby
don't give you a sugar dog, I will. This Christmas dressing is all
nonsense," he added, "but the child's not to blame--it was natural."

"After all," he said to his wife the last thing after they were settled
for the night, "our little Dolly is an unusual child. There were not
many little girls that would have dared to do that. I shall preach a
sermon right away that will set all this Christmas matter straight,"
said the Doctor. "There is not a shadow of evidence that the first
Christians kept Christmas. It wasn't kept for the first three centuries,
nor was Christ born anywhere near the 25th of December."

       *       *       *       *       *

The next morning found little Dolly's blue eyes wide open with all the
wondering eagerness of a new idea.

Dolly had her wise thoughts about Christmas. She had been terribly
frightened at first, when she was brought home from the church; but when
her papa kissed her and promised her a sugar dog she was quite sure
that, whatever the unexplained mystery might be, he did not think the
lovely scene of the night before a wicked one. And when Mrs. Cushing
came and covered the little girl up warmly in bed, she only said to her,
"Dolly, you must never get out of bed again at night after you are put
there; you might have caught a dreadful cold and been sick and died, and
then we should have lost our little Dolly." So Dolly promised quite
readily to be good and lie still ever after, no matter what attractions
might be on foot in the community.

Much was gained, however, and it was all clear gain; and forthwith the
little fanciful head proceeded to make the most of it, thinking over
every feature of the wonder. The child had a vibrating, musical
organization, and the sway and rush of the chanting still sounded in her
ears and reminded her of that wonderful story in the "Pilgrim's
Progress", where the gate of the celestial city swung open, and there
were voices that sung, "Blessing and honor and glory and power be unto
Him who sitteth on the throne." And then that wonderful star, that shone
just as if it were a real star--how could it be! For Miss Ida Lewis,
being a young lady of native artistic genius, had cut a little hole in
the centre of her gilt paper star, behind which was placed a candle, so
that it gave real light, in a way most astonishing to untaught eyes. In
Dolly's simple view it verged on the supernatural--perhaps it was _the_
very real star read about in the Gospel story. Why not? Dolly was at the
happy age when anything bright and heavenly seemed credible, and had the
child-faith to which all things were possible.

"I wish, my dear," said Mrs. Cushing, after they were retired to their
room for the night, "that to-morrow morning you would read the account
of the birth of Christ in St. Matthew, and give the children some advice
upon the proper way of keeping Christmas."

"Well, but you know we don't _keep_ Christmas; nobody knows anything
about Christmas," said the Doctor.

"You know what I mean, my dear," replied his wife. "You know that my
mother and her family _do_ keep Christmas. I always heard of it when I
was a child; and even now, though I have been out of the way of it so
long, I cannot help a sort of kindly feeling toward these ways. I am not
surprised at all that the children got drawn over last night to the
service. I think it's the most natural thing in the world, and I know by
experience just how attractive such things are. I shouldn't wonder if
this other church should draw very seriously on your congregation; but I
don't want it to begin by taking away our own children. Dolly is an
inquisitive child; a child that thinks a good deal, and she'll be asking
all sorts of questions about the why and wherefore of what she saw last
night."

"Oh, yes, Dolly is a bright one. Dolly's an uncommon child," said the
Doctor, who had a pardonable pride in his children--they being, in fact,
the only worldly treasure that he was at all rich in.

He rose up early on the following Sabbath and proceeded to buy a sugar
dog at the store of Lucius Jenks, and when Dolly came down to breakfast
he called her to him and presented it, saying as he kissed her:

"Papa gives you this, not because it is Christmas, but because he loves
his little Dolly."

"But _isn't_ it Christmas?" asked Dolly with a puzzled air.

"No, child; nobody knows when Christ was born, and there is nothing in
the Bible to tell us _when_ to keep Christmas."

And then in family worship the Doctor read the account of the birth of
Christ and of the shepherds abiding in the fields who came at the call
of the angels, and they sung the old hymn:


     "While shepherds watched their flocks by night."


"Now, children," he said when all was over, "you must be good children
and go to school. If we are going to keep any day on account of the
birth of Christ, the best way to keep it is by doing all our duties on
that day better than any other. Your duty is to be good children, go to
school and mind your lessons."

Tom and Bill were quite ready to fall in with their father's view of the
matter. As for Dolly, she put her little tongue advisedly to the back of
her sugar dog and found that he was very sweet indeed--a most tempting
little animal. She even went so far as to nibble off a bit of the green
ground he stood on--yet resolved heroically not to eat him at once, but
to make him last as long as possible. She wrapped him tenderly in cotton
and took him to the school with her, and when her confidential friend,
Bessie Lewis, displayed her Christmas gifts, Dolly had something on her
side to show, though she shook her curly head and informed Bessie in
strict confidence that there wasn't any such thing as Christmas, her
papa had told her so--a heresy which Bessie forthwith reported when she
went home at noon.

"Poor little child--and did she say so?" asked gentle old Grandmamma
Lewis. "Well, dear, you mustn't blame her--she don't know any better.
You bring the little one in here to-night and I'll give her a Christmas
cooky. I'm sorry for such children."

And so, after school, Dolly went in to see dear old Madam Lewis, who sat
in her rocking-chair in the front parlor, where the fire was snapping
behind great tall brass andirons and all the pictures were overshadowed
with boughs of spruce and pine. Dolly gazed about her with awe and
wonder. Over one of the pictures was suspended a cross of green with
flowers of white everlasting.

"What is _that_ for?" asked Dolly, pointing solemnly with her little
forefinger, and speaking under her breath.

"Dear child, that is the picture of my poor boy who died--ever so many
years ago. That is my cross--we have all one--to carry."

Dolly did not half understand these words, but she saw tears in the
gentle old lady's eyes and was afraid to ask more.

She accepted thankfully and with her nicest and best executed courtesy a
Christmas cooky representing a good-sized fish, with fins all spread and
pink sugar-plums for eyes, and went home marveling yet more about this
mystery of Christmas.

As she was crossing the green to go home the Poganuc stage drove in,
with Hiel seated on high, whipping up his horses to make them execute
that grand _entrée_ which was the glory of his daily existence.

Now that the stage was on runners, and slipped noiselessly over the
smooth frozen plain, Hiel cracked his whip more energetically and
shouted louder, first to one horse then to another, to make up for the
loss of the rattling wheels; and he generally had the satisfaction of
seeing all the women rushing distractedly to doors and windows, and
imagined them saying, "There's Hiel; the stage is in!"

"Hulloa, Dolly!" he called out, drawing up with a suddenness which threw
the fore-horses back upon their haunches. "I've got a bundle for your
folks. Want to ride? You may jest jump up here by me and I'll take you
'round to your father's door;" and so Dolly reached up her little
red-mittened hand, and Hiel drew her up beside him.

"'Xpect ye want a bit of a ride, and I've got a bundle for Widder
Badger, down on South Street, so I guess I'll go 'round that way to make
it longer. I 'xpect this 'ere bundle is from some of your ma's folks in
Boston--'Piscopals they be and keeps Christmas. Good-sized bundle 'tis;
reckon it'll come handy in a good many ways."

So, after finishing his detour, Hiel landed his little charge at the
parsonage door.

"Reckon I'll be over when I've put up my hosses," he said to Nabby when
he handed down the bundle to her. "I hain't been to see you much lately,
Nabby, and I know you've been a-pinin' after me, but fact is--"

"Well, now, Hiel Jones, you jest shet up with your imperence," said
Nabby, with flashing eyes; "you jest look out or you'll get suthin."

"I 'xpect to get a kiss when I come 'round to-night," said Hiel,
composedly. "Take care o' that air bundle, now; mebbe there's glass or
crockery in't."

"Hiel Jones," said Nabby, "don't give me none o' your saace, for I won't
take it. Jim Sawin said last night you was the brassiest man he ever
see. He said there was brass enough in your face to make a kettle of."

"You tell him there's sap enough in his head to fill it, anyway," said
Hiel. "Good bye, Nabby, I'll come 'round this evenin'," and he drove
away at a rattling pace, while Nabby, with flushed cheeks and snapping
eyes, soliloquized:

"Well, I hope he will come! I'd jest like a chance to show him how
little I care for him."

Meanwhile the bundle was soon opened, and contained a store of
treasures: a smart little red dress and a pair of red shoes for Dolly, a
half dozen pocket-handkerchiefs for Dr. Cushing, and "Robinson Crusoe"
and "Sanford and Merton," handsomely bound, for the boys, and a bonnet
trimming for Mrs. Cushing. These were accompanied by a characteristic
letter from Aunt Debby Kittery, opening as follows:


     "DEAR SISTER:

     "Mother worries because she thinks you won't get any Christmas
     presents. However, this comes to give every one of you some of the
     crumbs which fall from the church's table, and Mother says she
     wishes you all a pious Christmas, which she thinks is better than a
     merry one. If I didn't lay violent hands on her she would use all
     our substance in riotous giving of Christmas presents to all the
     beggars and chimney sweeps in Boston. She is in good health and
     talks daily of wanting to see you and the children; and I hope
     before long you will bring some of them, and come and make us a
     visit.

     "Your affectionate sister,

     "DEBBY KITTERY."


There was a scene of exultation and clamor in the parsonage as these
presents were pulled out and discussed; and when all possible joy was
procured from them in the sitting-room, the children rushed in a body
into the kitchen and showed them to Nabby, calling on her to join their
acclamations.

On the whole, when Dolly had said her prayers that night and thought the
matter over, she concluded that her Christmas Day had been quite a
success.


THE SECOND CHRISTMAS.

Once more had Christmas come round in Poganuc; once more the Episcopal
church was being dressed with ground-pine and spruce; but this year
economy had begun to make its claims felt. An illumination might do very
well to open a church, but there were many who said "to what purpose is
this waste?" when the proposition was made to renew it yearly.
Consequently it was resolved to hold the Christmas Eve service with only
that necessary amount of light which would enable the worshipers to read
the prayers.

On this Christmas Eve Dolly went to bed at her usual hour with a
resigned and quiet spirit. She felt herself a year older, and more than
a year wiser, than when Christmas had first dawned upon her
consciousness.

Mis' Persis appeared on the ground by day-dawn. A great kettle was slung
over the kitchen fire, in which cakes of tallow were speedily
liquefying; a frame was placed quite across the kitchen to sustain
candle-rods, with a train of boards underneath to catch the drippings,
and Mis' Persis, with a brow like one of the Fates, announced: "Now we
can't hev any young 'uns in this kitchen to-day;" and Dolly saw that
there was no getting any attention in that quarter.

Mis' Persis, in a gracious Saturday afternoon mood, sitting in her own
tent-door dispensing hospitalities and cookies, was one thing; but Mis'
Persis in her armor, with her loins girded and a hard day's work to be
conquered, was quite another: she was terrible as Minerva with her
helmet on.

Dinner-baskets for all the children were hastily packed, and they were
sent off to school with the injunction on no account to show their faces
about the premises till night. The Doctor, warned of what was going on,
retreated to his study at the top of the house, where, serenely above
the lower cares of earth, he sailed off into President Edwards' treatise
on the nature of true virtue, concerning which he was preparing a paper
to read at the next association meeting.

That candles were a necessity of life he was well convinced, and by
faith he dimly accepted the fact that one day in the year the whole
house was to be devoted and given up to this manufacture; and his part
of the business, as he understood it, was, clearly, to keep himself out
of the way till it was over.

"There won't be much of a dinner at home, anyway," said Nabby to Dolly,
as she packed her basket with an extra doughnut or two. "I've got to go
to church to-day, 'cause I'm one of the singers, and your ma'll be busy
waitin' on _her_; so we shall just have a pick-up dinner, and you be
sure not to come home till night; by that time it'll be all over."

Dolly trotted off to school well content with the prospect before her: a
nooning, with leave to play with the girls at school, was not an
unpleasant idea.

But the first thing that saluted her on her arrival was that Bessie
Lewis--her own dear, particular Bessie--was going to have a Christmas
party at her house that afternoon, and was around distributing
invitations right and left among the scholars with a generous freedom.

"We are going to have nuts, and raisins, and cakes, and mottoes," said
Bessie, with artless triumph. The news of this bill of fare spread like
wildfire through the school.

Never had a party been heard of which contemplated such a liberal
entertainment, for the rising generation of Poganuc were by no means
wearied with indulgence, and raisins and almonds stood for grandeur with
them. But these _mottoes_, which consisted of bits of confectionery
wrapped up in printed couplets of sentimental poetry, were an unheard-of
refinement. Bessie assured them that her papa had sent clear to Boston
for them, and whoever got one would have his or her fortune told by it.

The school was a small, select one, comprising the children of all ages
from the best families of Poganuc. Both boys and girls, and all with
great impartiality, had been invited. Miss Titcome, the teacher, quite
readily promised to dismiss at three o'clock that afternoon any scholar
who should bring a permission from parents, and the children nothing
doubted that such a permission was obtainable.

Dolly alone saw a cloud in the horizon. She had been sent away with
strict injunctions not to return till evening, and children in those
days never presumed to make any exceptions in obeying an absolute
command of their parents.

"But, of course, you will go home at noon and ask your mother, and of
course she'll let you; won't she, girls?" said Bessie.

"Oh, certainly; of course she will," said all the older girls, "because
you know a party is a thing that don't happen every day, and your mother
would think it strange if you _didn't_ come and ask her." So, too,
thought Miss Titcome, a most exemplary, precise and proper young lady,
who always moved and spoke and thought as became a schoolmistress, so
that, although she was in reality only twenty years old, Dolly
considered her as a very advanced and ancient person--if anything, a
little older than her father and mother.

Even she was of opinion that Dolly might properly go home to lay a case
of such importance before her mother; and so Dolly rushed home after the
morning school was over, running with all her might, and increasing in
mental excitement as she ran. Her bonnet blew off upon her shoulders,
her curls flew behind her in the wind, and she most inconsiderately used
up the little stock of breath that she would want to set her cause in
order before her mother.

Just here we must beg any mother and housekeeper to imagine herself in
the very midst of the most delicate, perplexing and laborious of
household tasks, when interruption is most irksome and perilous,
suddenly called to discuss with a child some new and startling
proposition to which at the moment she cannot even give a thought.

Mrs. Cushing was sitting in the kitchen with Mis' Persis, by the side of
a caldron of melted tallow, kept in a fluid state by the heat of a
portable furnace on which it stood. A long train of half-dipped candles
hung like so many stalactites from the frames on which the rods rested,
and the two were patiently dipping set after set and replacing them
again on the frame.

"As sure as I'm alive! if there isn't Dolly Cushing comin' back--runnin'
and tearin' like a wild cretur'," said Mis' Persis. "She'll be in here
in a minute and knock everything down!"

Mrs. Cushing looked, and with a quick movement stepped to the door.

"Dolly! what are you here for? Didn't I tell you not to come home this
noon?"

"Oh, mamma, there's going to be a party at General Lewis'--Bessie's
party--and the girls are all going; mayn't I go?"

"No, you can't; it's impossible," said her mother. "Your best dress
isn't ready to wear, and there's nobody can spend time to get you ready.
Go right back to school."

"But, mamma--"

"Go!" said her mother, in the decisive tone that mothers used in the old
days, when arguing with children was not a possibility.

"What's all this about?" asked the Doctor, looking out of the door.

"Why," said Mrs. Cushing, "there's going to be a party at General
Lewis', and Dolly is wild to go. It's just impossible for me to attend
to her now."

"Oh, I don't want her intimate at Lewis's," said the Doctor, and
immediately he came out behind his wife.

"There; run away to school, Dolly," he said. "Don't trouble your mother;
you don't want to go to parties; why, it's foolish to think of it. Run
away now, and don't think any more about it--there's a good girl!"

Dolly turned and went back to school, the tears freezing on her cheek as
she went. As for not thinking any more about it--that was impossible.

When three o'clock came, scholar after scholar rose and departed, until
at last Dolly was the only one remaining in the school-room.

When Dolly came home that night the coast was clear, and the candles
were finished and put away to harden in a freezing cold room; the
kitchen was once more restored, and Nabby bustled about getting supper
as if nothing had happened.

"I really feel sorry about poor little Dolly," said Mrs. Cushing to her
husband.

"Do you think she cared much?" asked the Doctor, looking as if a new
possibility had struck his mind.

"Yes, indeed, poor child, she went away crying; but what could I do
about it? I couldn't stop to dress her."

"Wife, we must take her somewhere to make up for it," said the Doctor.

Just then the stage stopped at the door and a bundle from Boston was
handed in. Dolly's tears were soon wiped and dried, and her mourning was
turned into joy when a large jointed London doll emerged from the
bundle, the Christmas gift of her grandmother in Boston.

Dolly's former darling was old and shabby, but this was of twice the
size, and with cheeks exhibiting a state of the most florid health.

Besides this there was, as usual in grandmamma's Christmas bundle,
something for every member of the family; and so the evening went on
festive wings.

Poor little Dolly! only that afternoon she had watered with her tears,
at school, the dismal long straight seam, which stretched on before her
as life sometimes does to us, bare, disagreeable and cheerless. She had
come home crying, little dreaming of the joy just approaching; but
before bed-time no cricket in the hearth was cheerier or more noisy. She
took the new dolly to bed with her, and could hardly sleep, for the
excitement of her company.

Meanwhile, Hiel had brought the Doctor a message to the following
effect:

"I was drivin' by Tim Hawkins', and Mis' Hawkins she comes out and says
they're goin' to hev an apple-cuttin' there to-morrow night, and she
would like to hev you and Mis' Cushin' and all your folks come--Nabby
and all."

The Doctor and his lady of course assented.

"Wal, then, Doctor--ef it's all one to you," continued Hiel, "I'd like
to take ye over in my new double sleigh. I've jest got two new strings
o' bells up from Boston, and I think we'll sort o' make the snow fly.
S'pose there'd be no objections to takin' my mother 'long with ye?"

"Oh, Hiel, we shall be delighted to go in company with your mother, and
we're ever so much obliged to you," said Mrs. Cushing.

"Wal, I'll be round by six o'clock," said Hiel.

"Then, wife," said the Doctor, "we'll take Dolly, and make up for the
loss of her party."

Punctually at six, Hiel's two horses, with all their bells jingling,
stood at the door of the parsonage, whence Tom and Bill, who had been
waiting with caps and mittens on for the last half hour, burst forth
with irrepressible shouts of welcome.

"Take care now, boys; don't haul them buffalo skins out on t' the snow,"
said Hiel. "Don't get things in a muss gen'ally; wait for your ma and
the Doctor. Got to stow the grown folks in fust; boys kin hang on
anywhere."

And so first came Mrs. Cushing and the Doctor, and were installed on the
back seat, with Dolly in between. Then hot bricks were handed in to keep
feet warm, and the buffalo robe was tucked down securely. Then Nabby
took her seat by Hiel in front, and the sleigh drove round for old Mrs.
Jones. The Doctor insisted on giving up his place to her and tucking her
warmly under the buffalo robe, while he took the middle seat and acted
as moderator between the boys, who were in a wild state of hilarity.
Spring, with explosive barks, raced first on this and then on that side
of the sleigh as it flew swiftly over the smooth frozen road.

The stars blinked white and clear out of a deep blue sky, and the path
wound up-hill among cedars and junipers and clumps of mountain laurel,
on whose broad green leaves the tufts of snow lay like clusters of white
roses. The keen clear air was full of stimulus and vigor; and so Hiel's
proposition to take the longest way met with enthusiastic welcome from
all the party. Next to being a bird, and having wings, is the sensation
of being borne over the snow by a pair of spirited horses who enjoy the
race, apparently, as much as those they draw. Though Hiel contrived to
make the ride about eight miles, it yet seemed but a short time before
the party drove up to the great red farmhouse, whose lighted windows
sent streams of radiant welcome far out into the night.

Our little Dolly had had an evening of unmixed bliss. Everybody had
petted her, and talked to her, and been delighted with her sayings and
doings, and she was carrying home a paper parcel of sweet things which
good Mrs. Hawkins had forced into her hand at parting. She had spent a
really happy Christmas!




THE CHRISTMAS PRINCESS.

BY MRS. MOLESWORTH.


In the olden times there lived a king who was worthy of the name. He
loved his people, and his people loved him in return. His kingdom must
have been large; at least it appears to be beyond doubt that it extended
a good way in different directions, for it was called the Kingdom of the
Four Orts, which, of course, as everybody knows, means that he had
possessions north, south, east, and west.

It was not so large, however, but that he was able to manage it well for
himself--that is to say, with certain help which I will tell you of. A
year never passed without his visiting every part of his dominions and
inquiring for himself into the affairs of his subjects. Perhaps--who can
say?--the world was not so big in those days; doubtless, however that
may have been, there were not so many folk living on it.

Many things were different in those times: many things existed which
nowadays would be thought strange and incredible. Human beings knew much
more than they do now about the other dwellers on the earth. For
instance, it was no uncommon case to find learned men who were able to
converse with animals quite as well as with each other. Fairies, of
course, were often visible to mortal eyes, and it was considered quite
natural that they should interfere for good--sometimes, perhaps, for
evil; as to that I cannot say--in human affairs. And good King
Brave-Heart was especially favored in this way. For the help which, as I
said, was his in governing his people was that of four very wise
counselors indeed--the four fairies of the North and the South, the East
and the West.

These sisters were very beautiful as well as very wise. Though older
than the world itself, they always looked young. They were very much
attached to each other, though they seldom met, and it must be confessed
that sometimes on such occasions there were stormy scenes, though they
made it up afterward. And the advice they gave was always to be relied
upon.

Now, King Brave-Heart was married. His wife was young and charming, and
devotedly fond of him. But she was of a rather jealous and exacting
disposition, and she had been much spoilt in her youth at her own home.
She was sweet and loving, however, which makes up for a good deal, and
always ready to take part in any scheme for the good of their people,
provided it did not separate her from her husband.

They had no children, though they had been married for some years; but
at last there came the hope of an heir, and the Queen's delight was
unbounded--nor was the King's joy less than hers.

It was late autumn, or almost winter, when a great trouble befell the
pretty Queen. The weather had grown suddenly cold, and a few snowflakes
even had fallen before their time. But Queen Claribel only clapped her
hands at the sight, for with the winter she hoped the baby would come,
and she welcomed the signs of its approach on this account. The King,
however, looked grave, and when the next morning the ground was all
white, the trees and the bushes covered with silvery foliage, he looked
graver still.

"Something is amiss," he said. "The Fairy of the North must be on her
way, and it is not yet time for her visit."

And that very afternoon the snow fell again, more heavily than before,
and the frost-wind whistled down the chimneys and burst open the doors
and windows, and all the palace servants went hurrying and scurrying
about to make great fires and hang up thick curtains and get everything
in order for the cold season, which they had not expected so soon.

"It will not last," said the King, quietly. "In a few days there will be
milder weather again." But, nevertheless, he still looked grave.

And early the next morning, as he was sitting with the Queen, who was
beginning to feel a little frightened at the continuance of the storm,
the double doors of her boudoir suddenly flew open, an icy blast filled
the room, and a tall, white-shrouded figure stood before them.

"I have come to fetch you, Brave-Heart," she said abruptly. "You are
wanted, sorely wanted, in my part of the world. The people are starving:
the season has been a poor one, and there has been bad faith. Some few
powerful men have bought up the grain, which was already scarce, and
refuse to let the poor folk have it. Nothing will save their lives or
prevent sad suffering but your own immediate presence. Are you ready?
You must have seen I was coming."

She threw off her mantle as she spoke and sank on to a couch. Strong as
she was, she seemed tired with the rate at which she had traveled, and
the warm air of the room was oppressive to her. Her clear, beautiful
features looked harassed; her gray eyes full of anxiety. For the moment
she took no notice of the Queen.

"Are you ready?" she repeated.

"Yes, I am ready!" said Brave-Heart, as he rose to his feet.

But the Queen threw herself upon him, with bitter crying and reproaches.
Would he leave _her_, and at such a time, a prey to all kinds of
terrible anxiety? Then she turned to the fairy and upbraided her in
unmeasured language. But the spirit of the North glanced at her with
calm pity.

"Poor child!" she said, "I had almost forgotten you. The sights I have
seen of late have been so terrible that they absorb me. Take courage,
Claribel! Show yourself a queen. Think of the suffering mothers and
their little ones whom your husband hastens to aid. All will be well
with you, believe me. But you, too, must be brave and unselfish."

It was no use. All she said but made the Queen more indignant. She would
scarcely bid her husband farewell: she turned her back to the fairy with
undignified petulance.

"Foolish child," said the Northern spirit. "She will learn better some
day."

Then she gave all her attention to the matter she had come about,
explaining to the King as they journeyed exactly the measures he must
take and the difficulties to be overcome. But though the King had the
greatest faith in her advice, and never doubted that it was his duty to
obey, his heart was sore, as you can understand.

Things turned out as he had said. The severe weather disappeared again
as if by magic, and some weeks of unusually mild days followed. And when
the winter did set in for good at last, it was with no great rigor. From
time to time news reached the palace of the King's welfare. The tidings
were cheering. His presence was effecting all that the fairy had hoped.

So Queen Claribel ought to have been happy. But she was determined not
to be. She did nothing but cry and abuse the fairy, declaring that she
would never see her dear Brave-Heart again, and that if ever her baby
came she was sure it would not live, or that there would be something
dreadful the matter with it.

"It is not fair," she kept saying, "it is a shame that I should suffer
so."

And even when on Christmas Eve a beautiful little girl was born, as
pretty and lively and healthy as could be wished, and even though the
next day brought the announcement of the King's immediate return,
Claribel still nursed her resentment, though in the end it came to be
directed entirely against the fairy. For when she saw Brave-Heart again,
his tender affection and his delight in his little daughter made it
impossible for her not to "forgive him," as she expressed it, though she
could not take any interest in his accounts of his visit to the north
and all he had been able to do there.

A great feast was arranged in honor of the christening of the little
Princess. All the grand people of the neighborhood were bidden to it,
nor, you may be sure, did the good King forget the poorer folk. The four
fairies were invited, for it was a matter of course that they should be
the baby's godmothers. And though the Queen would gladly have excluded
the Northern fairy, she dared not even hint at such a thing.

But she resolved in her own mind to do all in her power to show that she
was not the welcome fairy.

On such occasions, when human beings were honored by the presence of
fairy visitors, these distinguished guests were naturally given
precedence of all others, otherwise very certainly they would never have
come again. Even among fairies themselves there are ranks and
formalities, and the Queen well knew that the first place was due to the
Northern spirit. But she gave instructions that this rule should be
departed from, and the Snow fairy, as she was sometimes called, found
herself placed at the King's left hand, separated from him by her sister
of the West, instead of next to him on the right, which seat, on the
contrary, was occupied by the fairy of the South. She glanced round her
calmly, but took no notice; and the King, imagining that by her own
choice perhaps, she had chosen the unusual position, made no remark. And
the feast progressed with the accustomed splendor and rejoicing.

But at the end, when the moment arrived at which the four godmothers
were expected to state their gifts to the baby, the Queen's spite could
be no longer concealed.

"I request," she exclaimed, "that for reasons well known to herself, to
the King, and to myself, the Northern fairy's gift may be the last in
order instead of the first."

The King started and grew pale. The beautiful, soft-voiced fairy of the
South, in her glowing golden draperies, would fain have held back, for
her affection for her sterner sister was largely mingled with awe. But
the Snow fairy signed to her imperiously to speak.

"I bestow upon the Princess Sweet-Heart," she said, half tremblingly,
"the gift of great beauty."

"And I," said the spirit of the East, who came next, her red robes
falling majestically around her, her dark hair lying smoothly in its
thick masses on her broad, low forehead, "I give her great powers of
intellect and intelligence."

"And I," said the Western fairy, with a bright, breezy flutter of her
sea-green garments, "health--perfect health and strength of body, as my
gift to the pretty child."

"And you," said the Queen bitterly, "you, cold-hearted fairy, who have
done your best to kill me with misery, who came between my husband and
me, making him neglect me as he never would have done but for your
influence--what will _you_ give my child? Will you do something to make
amends for the suffering you caused? I would rather my pretty baby were
dead than that she lived to endure what I have of late endured."

"Life and death are not mine to bestow or to withhold," said the
Northern spirit calmly, as she drew her white garments more closely
round her with a majestic air. "So your rash words, foolish woman,
fortunately for you all, cannot touch the child. But something--much--I
can do, and I will. She shall not know the suffering you dread for her
with so cowardly a fear. She shall be what you choose to fancy _I_ am.
And instead of the name you have given her, she shall be known for what
she is--Princess Ice-Heart."

She turned to go, but the King on one hand, her three sisters on the
other, started forward to detain her.

"Have pity!" exclaimed the former.

"Sister, bethink you," said the latter; the Western fairy adding
beseechingly, the tears springing in her blue eyes, which so quickly
changed from bright to sad, "Say something to soften this hard fate.
Undo it you cannot, I know. Or, at least, allow me to mitigate it if I
can."

The Snow fairy stopped; in truth, she was far from hard-hearted or
remorseless, and already she was beginning to feel half sorry for what
she had done.

"What would you propose?" she said coldly.

The fairy of the West threw back her auburn hair with a gesture of
impatience.

"I would I knew!" she said. "'Tis a hard knot you have tied, my sister.
For that which would mend the evil wrought seems to me impossible while
the evil exists--the cure and the cessation of the disease are one. How
could the heart of ice be melted till tender feelings warm it, and how
can tender feelings find entrance into a feelingless heart? Alas! alas!
I can but predict what sounds like a mockery of your trouble," she went
on, turning to the King, though indeed by this time she might have
included the Queen in her sympathy, for Claribel stood, horrified at the
result of her mad resentment, as pale as Brave-Heart himself. "Hearken!"
and her expressive face, over which sunshine and showers were wont to
chase each other as on an April day--for such, as all know, is the
nature of the changeful, lovable spirit of the West--for once grew still
and statue-like, while her blue eyes pierced far into the distance. "The
day on which the Princess of the Icy Heart shall shed a tear, that heart
shall melt--but then only."

The Northern fairy murmured something under her breath, but what the
words were no one heard, for it was not many that dared stand near to
her, so terribly cold was her presence. The graceful spirit of the South
fluttered her golden locks, and with a little sigh drew her radiant
mantle round her, and kissed her hand in farewell, while the
thoughtful-eyed, mysterious Eastern fairy linked her arm in that of her
Western sister, and whispered that the solution of the problem should
have her most earnest study. And the green-robed spirit tried to smile
through her tears in farewell as she suffered herself to be led away.

So the four strange guests departed; but their absence was not followed
by the usual outburst of unconstrained festivity. On the contrary, a
sense of sorrow and dread hung over all who remained, and before long
everyone not immediately connected with the palace respectfully but
silently withdrew, leaving the King and Queen to their mysterious
sorrow.

Claribel flew to the baby's cradle. The little Princess was sleeping
soundly; she looked rosy and content--a picture of health. Her mother
called eagerly to the King.

"She seems just as usual," she exclaimed. "Perhaps--oh! perhaps after
all I have done no harm."

For, strange to say, her resentment against the Northern fairy had died
away. She now felt nothing but shame and regret for her own wild temper.
"Perhaps," she went on, "it was but to try me, to teach me a lesson,
that the Snow fairy uttered those terrible words."

Brave-Heart pitied his wife deeply, but he shook his head.

"I dare not comfort you with any such hopes," he said, "my poor
Claribel. The fairy is true--true as steel--if you could but have
trusted her! Had you seen her, as I have done--full of tenderest pity
for suffering--you could never have so maligned her."

Claribel did not answer, but her tears dropped on the baby's face. The
little Princess seemed annoyed by them. She put up her tiny hand and,
with a fretful expression, brushed them off.

And that very evening the certainty came.

The head nurse sent for the Queen while she was undressing the child,
and the mother hastened to the nursery. The attendants were standing
round in the greatest anxiety, for, though the baby looked quite well
otherwise, there was the strangest coldness over her left side, in the
region of the heart. The skin looked perfectly colorless, and the soft
cambric and still softer flannel of the finest which had covered the
spot were stiff, as if they had been exposed to a winter night's frost.

"Alas!" exclaimed Claribel, but that was all. It was no use sending for
doctors--no use doing anything. Her own delicate hand when she laid it
on the baby's heart was, as it were, blistered with cold. The next
morning she found it covered with chilblains.

But the baby did not mind. She flourished amazingly, heart or no heart.
She was perfectly healthy, ate well, slept well, and soon gave signs of
unusual intelligence. She was seldom put out, but when angry she
expressed her feelings by loud roars and screams, though with never a
tear! At first this did not seem strange, as no infant sheds tears
during the earliest weeks of its life. But when she grew to six months
old, then to a year, then to two and three, and was near her fourth
birthday without ever crying, it became plain that the prediction was
indeed to be fulfilled.

And the name "Ice-Heart" clung to her. In spite of all her royal
parents' commands to the contrary, "Princess Ice-Heart" she was called
far and near. It seemed as if people could not help it. "Sweet-Heart we
cannot name her, for sweet she is not," was murmured by all who came in
contact with her.

And it was true. Sweet she certainly was not. She was beautiful and
healthy and intelligent, but she had no feeling. In some ways she gave
little trouble. Her temper, though occasionally violent, was, as a rule,
placid; she seemed contented in almost all circumstances. When her good
old nurse died, she remarked coolly that she hoped her new attendant
would dress her hair more becomingly; when King Brave-Heart started on
some of his distant journeys she bade him good-bye with a smile,
observing that if he never came home again it would be rather amusing,
as she would then reign instead of him, and when she saw her mother
break into sobs at her unnatural speech she stared at her in blank
astonishment.

And so things went on until Ice-Heart reached her seventeenth year. By
this time she was, as regarded her outward appearance, as beautiful as
the fondest of parents could desire; she was also exceedingly strong and
healthy, and the powers of her mind were unusual. Her education had been
carefully directed, and she had learnt with ease and interest. She could
speak in several languages, her paintings were worthy of admiration, as
they were skillful and well executed; she could play with brilliancy on
various instruments. She had also been taught to sing, but her voice was
metallic and unpleasing. But she could discuss scientific and
philosophical subjects with the sages of her father's kingdom like one
of themselves.

And besides all this care bestowed upon her training, no stone had been
left unturned in hopes of awakening in the unfortunate girl some
affection or emotion. Every day the most soul-stirring poetry was read
aloud to her by the greatest elocutionists, the most exciting and moving
dramas were enacted before her; she was taken to visit the poor of the
city in their pitiable homes; she was encouraged to see sad sights from
which most soft-hearted maidens would instinctively flee. But all was in
vain. She would express interest and ask intelligent questions with
calm, unmoved features and dry eyes. Even music, from which much had
been hoped, was powerless to move her to aught but admiration of the
performers' skill or curiosity as to the construction of their
instruments. There was but one peculiarity about her, which sometimes,
though they could not have explained why, seemed to Ice-Heart's unhappy
parents to hint at some shadowy hope. The sight of tears was evidently
disagreeable to her. More certainly than anything else did the signs of
weeping arouse one of her rare fits of anger--so much so that now and
then, for days together, the poor Queen dared not come near her child,
and tears were to her a frequent relief from her lifelong regrets.

So beautiful and wealthy and accomplished a maiden was naturally not
without suitors; and from this direction, too, at first, Queen Claribel
trusted fondly that cure might come.

"If she could but fall in love," she said, the first time the idea
struck her.

"My poor dear!" replied the King, "to see, you must have eyes; to love,
you must have a heart."

"But a heart she has," persisted the mother. "It is only, as it were,
asleep--frozen, like the winter stream which bursts forth again into
ever fresh life and movement with the awaking spring."

So lovers were invited, and lovers came and were made welcome by the
dozen. Lovers of every description--rich and poor, old and young,
handsome and ugly--so long as they were of passable birth and fair
character, King Brave-Heart was not too particular--in the forlorn hope
that among them one fortunate wight might rouse some sentiment in the
lovely statue he desired to win. But all in vain. Each prince, or duke,
or simple knight, duly instructed in the sad case, did his best: one
would try poetry, another his lute, a third sighs and appeals, a fourth,
imagining he had made some way, would attempt the bold stroke of telling
Ice-Heart that unless she could respond to his adoration he would drown
himself. She only smiled, and begged him to allow her to witness the
performance--she had never seen anyone drown. So, one by one, the troupe
of aspirants--some in disgust, some in strange fear, some in
annoyance--took their departure, preferring a more ordinary spouse than
the bewitched though beautiful Princess.

And she saw them go with calmness, though, in one or two cases she had
replied to her parents that she had no objection to marry Prince
So-and-so, or Count Such-another, if they desired it--it would be rather
agreeable to have a husband if he gave her plenty of presents and did
all she asked. "Though a sighing and moaning lover, or a man who is
always twiddling a fiddle or making verses I could not stand," she would
add contemptuously.

So King Brave-Heart thought it best to try no such experiment. And in
future no gentleman was allowed to present himself except with the
understanding that he alone who should succeed in making Princess
Ice-Heart shed a tear would be accepted as her betrothed.

This proclamation diminished at once the number of suitors. Indeed,
after one or two candidates had failed, no more appeared--so well did it
come to be known that the attempt was hopeless.

And for more than a year Princess Ice-Heart was left to herself--very
much, apparently, to her satisfaction.

But all this time the mystic sisters were not idle or forgetful. Several
of the aspirants to Ice-Heart's hand had been chosen by them and
conveyed to the neighborhood of the palace by their intermediacy from
remote lands. And among these, one of the few who had found some slight
favor in the maiden's eyes was a special protégé of the Western
fairy--the young and spirited Prince Francolin.

He was not one of the sighing or sentimental order of swains; he was
full of life and adventure and brightness, and his heart was warm and
generous. He admired the beautiful girl, but he pitied her still more,
and this pity was the real motive which made him yield to the fairy's
proposal that he should try again.

"You pleased the poor child," she said, when she arrived one day at the
Prince's home to talk over her new idea. "You made her smile by your
liveliness and fun. For I was there when you little knew it. The girl
has been overdosed with sentimentality and doleful strains. I believe we
have been on a wrong track all this time."

"What do you propose?" said Francolin, gravely, for he could be serious
enough when seriousness was called for. "She did not actually dislike
me, but that is the most that can be said; and however I may feel for
her, however I may admire her beauty and intelligence, nothing would
induce me to wed a bride who could not return my affection. Indeed, I
could scarcely feel any for such a one."

"Ah no! I agree with you entirely," said the fairy. "But listen--my
power is great in some ways. I am well versed in ordinary enchantment,
and am most willing to employ my utmost skill for my unfortunate
god-daughter."

She then unfolded to him her scheme, and obtained his consent to it.

"Now is your time," she said, in conclusion. "I hear on the best
authority that Ice-Heart is feeling rather dull and bored at present. It
is some time since she has had the variety of a new suitor, and she will
welcome any distraction."

And she proceeded to arrange all the details of her plan.

So it came to pass that very shortly after the conversation I have
related there was great excitement in the capital city of the Kingdom of
the Four Orts. After an interval of more than a year a new suitor had at
length presented himself for the hand of the Princess Ice-Heart. Only
the King and Queen received the news with melancholy indifference.

"He may try as the others have done," said Brave-Heart to the messenger
announcing the arrival of the stranger at the gates, accompanied by a
magnificent retinue; "but it is useless." For the poor King was fast
losing all hope of his daughter's case; he was growing aged and
care-worn before his time.

"Does he know the terms attached to his acceptance?" inquired the Queen.

Yes, the messenger from the unknown candidate for the hand of the
beautiful Ice-Heart had been expressly charged to say that the Prince
Jocko--such was the new-comer's name--was fully informed as to all
particulars, and prepared to comply with the conditions.

The Princess' parents smiled somewhat bitterly. They had no hope, but
still they could not forbid the attempt.

"Prince Jocko?" said the King, "not a very prince-like name. However, it
matters little."

A few hours later the royal pair and their daughter, with all their
attendants, in great state and ceremony, were awaiting their guest. And
soon a blast of trumpets announced his approach. His retinue was indeed
magnificent; horsemen in splendid uniforms, followed by a troop of white
mules with negro riders in gorgeous attire, then musicians, succeeded by
the Prince's immediate attendants, defiled before the great marble steps
in front of the palace, at the summit of which the King, with the Queen
and Princess, was seated in state.

Ice-Heart clapped her hands.

"'Tis as good as a show," she said, "but where is the Prince?"

As she said the word the cortége halted. A litter, with closely drawn
curtains, drew up at the foot of the steps.

"Gracious!" exclaimed the Princess, "I hope he is not a molly-coddle;"
but before there was time to say more the curtains of the litter were
drawn aside, and in another moment an attendant had lifted out its
occupant, who forthwith proceeded to ascend the steps.

The parents and their daughter stared at each other and gasped.

Prince Jocko was neither more nor less than a monkey!

But such a monkey as never before had been seen. He was more comical
than words can express, and when at last he stood before them, and
bowed to the ground, a three-cornered hat in his hand, his sword
sticking straight out behind, his tail sweeping the ground, the effect
was irresistible. King Brave-Heart turned his head aside. Queen Claribel
smothered her face in her handkerchief. Princess Ice-Heart opened her
pretty mouth wide and forgot to close it again, while a curious
expression stole into her beautiful eyes.

Was it a trick?

No; Prince Jocko proceeded to speak.

He laid his little brown paw on his heart, bowed again, coughed,
sneezed, and finally began an oration. If his appearance was too funny,
his words and gestures were a hundred times more so. He rolled his eyes,
he declaimed, he posed and pirouetted like a miniature dancing-master,
and his little cracked voice rose higher and higher as his own fine
words and expressions increased in eloquence.

And at last a sound--which never before had been heard, save
faintly--made everyone start. The Princess was laughing as if she could
no longer contain herself. Clear, ringing, merry laughter, which it did
one's heart good to hear. And on she went, laughing ever, till--she
flung herself at her mother's feet, the tears rolling down her cheeks.

"Oh, mamma!" she exclaimed, "I never--" and then she went off again.

But Prince Jocko suddenly grew silent. He stepped up to Ice-Heart and,
respectfully raising her hand to his lips, gazed earnestly, beseechingly
into her face, his own keen sharp eyes gradually growing larger and
deeper in expression, till they assumed the pathetic, wistful look of
appeal one often sees in those of a noble dog.

"Ah, Princess!" he murmured.

And Ice-Heart stopped laughing. She pressed her hand to her side.

"Father! mother!" she cried, "help me! help me! Am I dying? What has
happened to me?" And, with a strange, long drawn sigh she sank fainting
to the ground.

There was great excitement in the palace, hurrying to and fro, fetching
of doctors, and much alarm. But when the Princess had been carried
indoors and laid on a couch, she soon revived. And who can describe the
feelings of the King and Queen when she turned to them with a smile such
as they had never seen on her face before.

"Dearest father, dearest mother," she said, "how I love you! Those
strange warm drops that filled my eyes seem to have brought new life to
me," and as the Queen passed her arm round the maiden she felt no chill
of cold such as used to thrill her with misery every time she embraced
her child.

"Sweet-Heart! my own Sweet-Heart!" she whispered.

And the Princess whispered back, "Yes, call me by that name always."

All was rejoicing when the wonderful news of the miraculous cure spread
through the palace and the city. But still the parents' hearts were
sore, for was not the King's word pledged that his daughter should marry
him who had effected this happy change? And this was no other than
Jocko, the monkey!

The Prince had disappeared at the moment that Ice-Heart fainted, and now
with his retinue he was encamped outside the walls. All sorts of ideas
occurred to the King.

"I cannot break my word," he said, "but we might try to persuade the
little monster to release me from it."

But the Princess would not hear of this.

"No," she said. "I owe him too deep a debt of gratitude to think of such
a thing. And in his eyes I read more than I can put in words. No, dear
father! you must summon him at once to be presented to our people as my
affianced husband."

So again the cortége of Prince Jocko made its way to the palace, and
again the litter, with its closely drawn curtains, drew up at the marble
steps. And Sweet-Heart stood, pale, but calm and smiling, to welcome her
ridiculous betrothed.

But who is this that quickly mounts the stairs with firm and manly
tread? Sweet-Heart nearly swooned again.

"Jocko?" she murmured. "Where is Jocko? Why, this is Prince Francolin!"

"Yes, dear child," said a bright voice beside her; and, turning round,
Sweet-Heart beheld the Western fairy, who, with her sisters, had
suddenly arrived. "Yes, indeed! Francolin, and no other!"

The universal joy may be imagined. Even the grave fairy of the North
smiled with pleasure and delight, and, as she kissed her pretty
god-daughter, she took the girl's hand and pressed it against her own
heart.

"Never misjudge me, Sweet-Heart," she whispered. "Cold as I seem to
those who have not courage to approach me closely, my heart, under my
icy mantle, is as warm as is now your own."

And so it was.

Where can we get a better ending than the time-honored one? Francolin
and Sweet-Heart were married, and lived happy ever after, and who knows
but what, in the Kingdom of the Four Orts, they are living happily
still?

If only we knew the way thither, we might see for ourselves if it is so.




WIDOW TOWNSEND'S VISITOR.


The fire crackled cheerfully on the broad hearth of an old-fashioned
fireplace in an old-fashioned public house in an old fashioned village,
down in that part of the Old Dominion called the "Eastern Shore." A cat
and three kittens basked in the warmth, and a decrepit yellow dog, lying
full in the reflection of the blaze, wrinkled his black nose
approvingly, as he turned his hind feet where his fore feet had been.
Over the chimney hung several fine hams and pieces of dried beef. Apples
were festooned along the ceiling, and other signs of plenty and good
cheer were scattered profusely about. There were plants, too, on the
window ledges, horse-shoe geraniums, and dew-plants, and a monthly rose,
just budding, to say nothing of pots of violets that perfumed the whole
place whenever they took it into their purple heads to bloom. The floor
was carefully swept, the chairs had not a speck of dust upon leg or
round, the long settle near the fireplace shone as if it had been just
varnished, and the eight-day clock in the corner had had its white face
newly washed, and seemed determined to tick the louder for it.

Two arm-chairs were drawn up at cozy distance from the hearth and each
other; a candle, a newspaper, a pair of spectacles, a dish of red
cheeked apples, and a pitcher of cider, filled a little table between
them. In one of these chairs sat a comfortable-looking woman about
forty-five, with cheeks as red as the apples, and eyes as dark and
bright as they had ever been, resting her elbow on the table and her
head upon her hand, and looking thoughtfully into the fire.

This was Widow Townsend, "relict" of Mr. Levi Townsend, who had been
mouldering into dust in the neighboring churchyard for seven years and
more. She was thinking of her dead husband, possibly because all her
work being done, and the servant gone to bed, the sight of his empty
chair at the other side of the table, and the silence of the room, made
her a little lonely.

"Seven years," so the widow's reverie ran; "it seems as if it were more
than fifty, and Christmas nigh here again, and yet I don't look so very
old neither. Perhaps it's not having any children to bother my life out,
as other people have. They may say what they like--children are more
plague than profit, that's my opinion. Look at my sister Jerusha, with
her six boys. She's worn to a shadow, and I am sure they have done it,
though she never will own it."

The widow took an apple from the dish and began to peel it.

"How fond Mr. Townsend used to be of these apples! He'll never eat any
more of them, poor fellow, for I don't suppose they have apples where he
has gone to. Heigho! I remember very well how I used to throw apple-peel
over my head when I was a girl to see who I was going to marry."

Mrs. Townsend stopped short and blushed, for in those days she did not
know Mr. T., and was always looking eagerly to see if the peel had
formed a capital S. Her meditations took a new turn.

"How handsome Sam Payson was, and how much I use to care about him! I
wonder what has become of him! Jerusha says he went away from our
village just after I did, and no one has ever heard of him since. What a
silly thing that quarrel was! If it had not been for that--"

Here came a long pause, during which the widow looked very steadfastly
at the empty arm-chair of Levi Townsend, deceased. Her fingers played
carelessly with the apple-peel: she drew it safely towards her, and
looked around the room.

"Upon my word, it is very ridiculous, and I don't know what the
neighbors would say if they saw me."

Still the plump fingers drew the red peel nearer.

"But then they can't see me, that's a comfort; and the cat and old Bose
never will know what it means. Of course I don't _believe_ anything
about it."

The peel hung gracefully from her hand.

"But still, I should like to try; it would seem like old times, and--"

Over her head it went, and curled up quietly on the floor at a little
distance. Old Bose, who always slept with one eye open, saw it fall, and
marched deliberately up to smell it.

"Bose--Bose--don't touch!" cried his mistress, and bending over it with
beating heart, she turned as red as fire. There was as handsome a
capital S as any one could wish to see.

A great knock came suddenly at the door. Bose growled, and the widow
screamed and snatched up the apple-peel.

"It's Mr. T.--it's his spirit come back again, because I tried that
silly trick," she thought fearfully to herself.

Another knock--louder than the first, and a man's voice exclaimed:

"Hello--the house!"

"Who is it?" asked the widow, somewhat relieved to find that the
departed Levi was still safe in his grave on the hillside.

"A stranger," said the voice.

"What do you want?"

"To get a lodging here for the night."

The widow deliberated.

"Can't you go on? There's a house half a mile farther, if you keep to
the right-hand side of the road, and turn to the left after you get
by--"

"It's raining cats and dogs, and I'm very delicate," said the stranger,
coughing. "I'm wet to the skin: don't you think you can accommodate
me?--I don't mind sleeping on the floor."

"Raining, is it? I didn't know that," and the kind-hearted little woman
unbarred the door very quickly. "Come in, whoever you may be; I only
asked you to go on because I am a lone woman, with only one servant in
the house."

The stranger entered, shaking himself like a Newfoundland dog upon the
step, and scattering a little shower of drops over his hostess and her
nicely swept floor.

"Ah, that looks comfortable after a man has been out for hours in a
storm," he said, as he caught sight of the fire; and striding along
toward the hearth, followed by Bose, who sniffed suspiciously at his
heels, he stationed himself in the arm-chair--_Mr. Townsend's
arm-chair_! which had been kept "sacred to his memory" for seven years.
The widow was horrified, but her guest looked so weary and worn-out that
she could not ask him to move, but busied herself in stirring up the
blaze that he might the sooner dry his dripping clothes.

A new thought struck her: Mr. T. had worn a comfortable dressing-gown
during his illness, which still hung in the closet at her right. She
could not let this poor man catch his death, by sitting in that wet
coat. If he was in Mr. Townsend's chair, why should he not be in Mr.
Townsend's wrapper? She went nimbly to the closet, took it down, fished
out a pair of slippers from a boot-rack below, and brought them to him.

"I think you had better take off your coat and boots--you will have the
rheumatic fever, or something like it, if you don't. Here are some
things for you to wear while they are drying. And you must be hungry,
too; I will go into the pantry and get you something to eat."

She bustled away, "on hospitable thoughts intent," and the stranger made
the exchange with a quizzical smile playing around his lips. He was a
tall, well-formed man, with a bold but handsome face, sun-burned and
heavily bearded, and looking anything but "delicate," though his blue
eyes glanced out from under a forehead as white as snow. He looked
around the kitchen with a mischievous air, and stretched out his feet
decorated with the defunct Boniface's slippers.

"Upon my word, this is stepping into the old man's shoes with a
vengeance! And what a hearty, good-humored looking woman she is! Kind as
a kitten," and he leaned forward and stroked the cat and her brood, and
then patted old Bose upon the head. The widow, bringing in sundry good
things, looked pleased at his attention to her dumb friends.

"It's a wonder Bose does not growl; he generally does if strangers touch
him. Dear me, how stupid!"

The last remark was neither addressed to the stranger nor to the dog but
to herself She had forgotten that the little stand was not empty, and
there was no room on it for the things she held.

"Oh, I'll manage it," said her guest, gathering up paper, candle,
apples, and spectacles (it was not without a little pang that she saw
them in his hand, for they had been her husband's, and were placed each
night, like the arm-chair, beside her) and depositing them on the
settle.

"Give me the table-cloth, ma'am, I can spread it as well as any woman;
I've learned that along with scores of other things, in my wanderings.
Now let me relieve you of those dishes; they are far too heavy for
those hands"--the widow blushed; "and now please, sit down with me, or I
cannot eat a morsel."

"I had supper long ago, but really I think I can take something more,"
said Mrs. Townsend, drawing her chair nearer to the table.

"Of course you can, my dear lady; in this cold fall weather people ought
to eat twice as much as they do in warm. Let me give you a piece of this
ham, your own curing, I dare say."

"Yes: my poor husband was very fond of it. He used to say that no one
understood curing ham and drying beef better than I."

"He was a most sensible man, I am sure. I drink your health, ma'am, in
this cider."

He took a long draught, and set down his glass.

"It is like nectar."

The widow was feeding Bose and the cat (who thought they were entitled
to a share of every meal eaten in the house), and did not quite hear
what he said.

"Fine dog, ma'am, and a very pretty cat."

"They were my husband's favorites," and a sigh followed the answer.

"Ah, your husband must have been a very happy man."

The blue eyes looked at her so long, that she grew flurried.

"Is there anything more I can get for you, sir?" she asked, at last.

"Nothing, thank you; I have finished."

She rose to clear the things away. He assisted her, and somehow their
hands had a queer knack of touching as they carried the dishes to the
pantry shelves. Coming back to the kitchen, she put the apples and cider
in their old places, and brought out a clean pipe and a box of tobacco
from an arched recess near the chimney.

"My husband always said he could not sleep after eating supper late
unless he smoked," she said. "Perhaps you would like to try it."

"Not if it is to drive you away," he answered, for she had her candle in
her hand.

"Oh, no; I do not object to smoke at all." She put the candle down; some
faint suggestion about "propriety" troubled her, but she glanced at the
old clock, and felt reassured. It was only half-past nine.

The stranger pushed the stand back after the pipe was lit, and drew her
easy-chair a little nearer the fire, and his own.

"Come, sit down," he said, pleadingly; "it's not late, and when a man
has been knocking about in California and all sorts of places, for a
score of years, he is glad enough to get into a berth like this, and to
have a pretty woman to speak to once again."

"California! Have you been in California?" she exclaimed, dropping into
the chair at once. Unconsciously, she had long cherished the idea that
Sam Payson, the lover of her youth, with whom she had so foolishly
quarreled, had pitched his tent, after many wanderings, in that far-off
land. Her heart warmed to one who, with something of Sam's looks and
ways about him, had also been sojourning in that country, and who very
possibly had met him--perhaps had known him intimately! At that thought
her heart beat quick, and she looked very graciously at the bearded
stranger, who, wrapped in Mr. Townsend's dressing-gown, wearing Mr.
Townsend's slippers, and sitting in Mr. Townsend's chair, beside Mr.
Townsend's wife, smoked Mr. Townsend's pipe with such an air of feeling
most thoroughly and comfortably at home!

"Yes, ma'am. I've been in California for the last six years. And before
that I went quite round the world in a whaling ship!"

"Good gracious!"

The stranger sent a puff of smoke curling gracefully over his head.

"It's very strange, my dear lady, how often you see one thing as you go
wandering about the world after that fashion."

"And what is that?"

"Men, without house or home above their heads, roving here and there,
and turning up in all sorts of odd places; caring very little for life
as a general thing, and making fortunes just to fling them away again,
and all for one reason. You don't ask me what _that_ is? No doubt you
know already very well."

"I think not, sir."

"Because a woman has jilted them!"

Here was a long pause, and Mr. Townsend's pipe emitted short puffs with
surprising rapidity. A guilty conscience needs no accuser, and the
widow's cheek was dyed with blushes as she thought of the absent Sam.

"I wonder how women manage when _they_ get served in the same way," said
the stranger musingly; "you never meet _them_ roaming up and down in
that style."

"No," said Mrs. Townsend, with some spirit, "if a woman is in trouble
she must stay at home and bear it, the best way she can. And there's
more women bearing such things than we know of, I dare say."

"Like enough. We never know whose hand gets pinched in a trap unless
they scream. And women are too shy or too sensible--which you
choose--for that."

"Did you ever, in all your wanderings, meet any one by the name of
Samuel Payson?" asked the widow, unconcernedly.

The stranger looked toward her; she was rummaging the table-drawer for
her knitting work, and did not notice him. When it was found, and the
needles in motion, he answered her.

"Payson--Sam Payson? Why, he was my most intimate friend! Do you know
him?"

"A little--that is, I used to, when I was a girl. Where did you meet
him?"

"He went with me on the whaling voyage I told you of, and afterward to
California. We had a tent together, and some other fellows with us, and
we worked the same claim for more than six months."

"I suppose he was quite well?"

"Strong as an ox."

"And--and happy?" pursued the widow, bending closer over her knitting.

"Hum--the less said about that the better, perhaps. But he seemed to
enjoy life after a fashion of his own. And he got rich out there, or
rather, I will say, well off."

Mrs. Townsend did not pay much attention to that part of the story.
Evidently she had not finished asking questions, but she was puzzled
about her next one. At last she brought it out beautifully:

"Was his wife with him in California?"

The stranger looked at her with twinkling eyes.

"His wife, ma'am! Why, bless you, he has not got any wife."

"Oh, I thought--I mean I heard"--here the little widow remembered the
fate of Ananias and Sapphira, and stopped short before she told such a
tremendous fib.

"Whatever you heard of his marrying was all nonsense, I can assure you.
I knew him well, and he had no thoughts of the kind about him. Some of
the boys used to tease him about it, but he soon made them stop."

"How?"

"He just told them frankly that the only woman he ever loved had jilted
him years before, and married another man. After that no one ever
mentioned the subject to him, except me."

Mrs. Townsend laid her knitting aside, and looked thoughtfully into the
fire.

"He was another specimen of the class of men I was speaking of. I have
seen him face death a score of times as quietly as I face the fire. 'It
matters very little what takes me off,' he used to say; 'I've nothing to
live for, and there's no one that will shed a tear for me when I am
gone.' It's a sad thought for a man to have, isn't it?"

Mrs. Townsend sighed as she said she thought it was.

"But did he ever tell you the name of the woman who jilted him?"

"I know her _first_ name."

"What was it?"

"Maria."

The plump little widow almost started out of her chair, the name was
spoken so exactly as Sam would have said it.

"Did you know her, too?" he asked, looking keenly at her.

"Yes."

"Intimately?"

"Yes."

"Where is she now? Still happy with her husband, I suppose, and never
giving a thought to the poor fellow she drove out into the world?"

"No," said Mrs. Townsend, shading her face with her hand, and speaking
unsteadily; "no, her husband is dead."

"Ah! but still she never thinks of Sam."

There was a dead silence.

"Does she?"

"How can I tell?"

"Are you still friends?"

"Yes."

"Then you ought to know, and you do. Tell me."

"I'm sure I don't know why I should. But if I do, you must promise me,
on your honor, never to tell him, if you ever meet him again."

"Madam, what you say to me never shall be repeated to any mortal man,
upon my honor."

"Well, then, she does remember him."

"But how?"

"As kindly, I think, as he could wish."

"I am glad to hear it, for his sake. You and I are the friends of both
parties: we can rejoice with each other."

He drew his chair much nearer hers, and took her hand. One moment the
widow resisted, but it was a magnetic touch, the rosy palm lay quietly
in his, and the dark beard bent so low that it nearly touched her
shoulder. It did not matter much. Was he not Samuel's dear friend? If he
was not the rose, had he not dwelt very near it, for a long, long time?

"It was a foolish quarrel that parted them," said the stranger, softly.

"Did he tell you about it?"

"Yes, on board the whaler."

"Did he blame her much?"

"Not so much as himself. He said that his jealousy and ill-temper drove
her to break off the match; but he thought sometimes if he had only gone
back and spoken kindly to her, she would have married him after all."

"I am sure she would," said the widow piteously. "She has owned it to me
more than a thousand times."

"She was not happy, then, with another."

"Mr.--that is to say, her husband--was very good and kind," said the
little woman, thinking of the lonely grave out on the hillside rather
penitently, "and they lived very pleasantly together. There never was a
harsh word between them."

"Still--might she not have been happier with Sam? Be honest, now, and
say just what you think."

"Yes."

"Bravo! that is what I wanted to come at. And now I have a secret to
tell you, and you must break it to her."

Mrs. Townsend looked rather scared.

"What is it?"

"I want you to go and see her, wherever she may be, and say to her,
'Maria,'--what makes you start so?"

"Nothing; only you speak so like some one I used to know, once in a
while."

"Do I? Well, take the rest of the message. Tell her that Sam loved her
through the whole; that, when he heard she was free, he began to work
hard at making a fortune. He has got it; and he is coming to share it
with her, if she will let him. Will you tell her this?"

The widow did not answer. She had freed her hand from his, and covered
her face with it. By and by she looked up again--he was waiting
patiently.

"Well?"

"I will tell her."

He rose from his seat, and walked up and down the room. Then he came
back, and leaning on the mantel-piece, stroked the yellow hide of Bose
with his slipper.

"Make her quite understand that he wants her for his wife. She may live
where she likes and how she likes, only it must be with him."

"I will tell her."

"Say he has grown old, but not cold; that he loves her now perhaps
better than he did twenty years ago; that he has been faithful to her
all through his life, and that he will be faithful till he dies."

The Californian broke off suddenly. The widow answered still, "I will
tell her."

"And what do you think she will say?" he asked, in an altered tone.

"What _can_ she say but _Come_!"

"Hurrah!"

The stranger caught her out of her chair as if she had been a child, and
kissed her.

"Don't--oh, don't!" she cried out. "I am Sam's Maria!"

"Well--I am Maria's Sam!"

Off went the dark wig and the black whiskers--there smiled the dear face
she had not forgotten! I leave you to imagine the tableau; even the cat
got up to look, and Bose sat on his stump of a tail, and wondered if he
was on his heels or his head.

The widow gave one little scream, and then she--

But, stop! Quiet people like you and me, dear reader, who have got over
all these follies, and can do nothing but turn up our noses at them,
have no business here. I will only add that two hearts were very happy,
that Bose concluded after a while that all was right, and so lay down to
sleep again, and that one week afterward, on Christmas Eve, there was a
wedding at the house that made the neighbors stare. The widow had
married her First Love!




THE OLD MAN'S CHRISTMAS.

BY ELLA WHEELER WILCOX.


I.

Though there was wrong on both sides, they never would have separated
had it not been for the old man.

He was Ben's father, and Ben was an only child--a spoiled, selfish,
high-tempered lad, who had grown up with the idea that his father, Anson
English, or the "old man," as his dutiful son called him, was much
richer than he really was, and that he had no need of any personal
effort--any object in life, aside from the pursuit of pleasure.

Ben's mother had died when he was fifteen years old and his father had
never married again. Yet it was not any allegiance to her memory which
had kept Anson English from a second marriage. He remembered her, to be
sure, and scarcely a day passed without his mentioning her. But after
her death, as during her weary life, he used her name as a synonym for
all that was undesirable. He compared everybody to "'Liz'beth," and
always to her disadvantage. He had a word of praise and encouragement
and approval for every housewife in the neighborhood except--his own.
Whatever went wrong, in doors or out, "'Liz'beth" was the direct or
indirect cause.

During the first five years of her married life, Elizabeth made
strenuous exertions to please her husband. She wept her sweet eyes dim
over her repeated failures. Then she found that she had been attempting
an impossible labor, and grew passively indifferent--an indifference
which lasted until death kindly released her.

Elizabeth had been a tidy housekeeper during these first years.

"You'd scrub and scour a man out 'er house an' home!" was all the praise
her husband gave her for her order and cleanliness; and to his
neighbors, to whom he was fond of paying informal visits, he would often
say--"Liz'beth's at it again--sweepin' and cleanin', so I cleared out.
Never see _her_ without out a broom in her hand. I'd a good deal rather
have a little more dirt, than so much tearin' 'round. 'Liz'beth tires
me, with her ways."

Yet, when in the indifference of despair which seized upon Elizabeth
before her death, she allowed her house to look after itself, Anson was
no better satisfied.

"I've come over to find a place to set down," he would tell his
neighbors. "'Liz'beth's let things 'cumulate, till the house is a sight
to see--she's gettin' dreadful slack, somehow. A man likes order when he
goes home to rest from all his cares."

Even when she died she displeased him by choosing a busy season for the
occasion.

"Just like 'Liz'beth, to die in hayin' time," he said. "Everything got
to stop--hay spoilin'--men idle. Women never seem to have no system
about work matters--no power of plannin' things, to make it convenient
like for men folks."

Yet after she was gone, Anson found how much help she had been to him,
how wonderful her economy had been, how light her expenditures. He knew
he could never find any one to replace her, in these respects, and as
money considerations were the main ones in his mind he believed it would
be the better economy to remain a widower, and hire his work done.

So during those most critical years of Ben's life, he had been without a
woman's guidance or care.

At eighteen he was all that arrogance, conceit, selfishness, and high
temper could render him. Yet he was a favorite with the fair sex for all
that, as he had a manly figure, and a warm, caressing way when he chose,
that won their admiration and pleased their vanity.

Anson English favored early marriages, and began to think it would be
better all around if Ben should bring a wife home.

She could do the work better than hired help, and keep the money all in
the family. And Ben would not waste his time and means on half a dozen,
as he was now doing, but would stay at home, no doubt, and settle down
into a sensible, practical business man. Yes, Ben ought to marry, and
his father told him so.

Ben smiled.

"I'm already thinking of it," he said. He had expected opposition from
his father, and was surprised at his suggestion.

"Yes," continued the "old man," as Ben already designated him, "I'd like
to see you settle down before you're twenty-one. But you want to make a
good choice. There's Abby Wilson, now. She's got the muscle of a man,
and ain't afraid of anything. And her father has a fine property--a
growin' property. Abby'll make a man a good, vigorous helpmate, and
she'll bring him money in time. You'd better shine up to Abby, Ben."

Ben gave a contemptuous laugh. "I'd as soon marry a dressed-up boy," he
said. "She's more like a boy than a girl in her looks and in her ways. I
have other plans in my mind, father, more to my taste. I mean to marry
Edith Gilman, if she'll take me, and I think she will."

A dark frown contracted Anson English's brow.

"Edith Gilman?" he repeated; "why, that puny schoolma'm, with her baby
face and weak voice, 'll never help _you_ to get a livin', Ben. What are
you thinkin' of?"

"Of love, father, I guess. I love her, and that's all there is of it.
And I shall marry her, if she'll take me, and you can like it or lump
it, as you please. She's a good girl, and if she's treated well all
round, she'll make a good wife, and she's the only woman that can put
the check rein on me, when I get in my tempers. She'll make a man of me
yet."

"But she can't work," insisted the father. "She looks as white and puny
as 'Liz'beth did the year she died."

"She's overworked in the school-room. I mean to take her home, and give
her a rest. I don't ask any woman to marry me and be my drudge. I expect
my wife will keep help."

The old man groaned aloud. Ben's ideas were positively ruinous. If he
married this girl, it would add to, not decrease, the family expenses.
But it was useless to oppose. Ben would do as he pleased, the old man
saw that plainly, and he might as well submit.

He did submit, and Ben married Edith on his twenty-first birthday, and
brought her home.


II.

Edith was a quiet little creature, with a soft voice, and a pale, sweet
face, and frail figure. She came up to Anson English when she entered
the house, and put her hands timidly upon his arms.

"I want you to love me," she said; "I have had no father or mother since
I can remember. I want to call you father, and I want to make you happy
if I can."

"Well, I'll tell you how," the old man retorted. "Discharge the hired
girl, and make good bread. That'll make me happy,"--and he laughed
harshly.

Edith shrank from his rough words, so void of the sympathy and love she
longed for. But she discharged the girl within a week, and tried to make
good bread. It was not a success, however, and the old man was not slow
to express his dissatisfaction. Edith left the table in tears.

"Another dribbler--'Liz'beth was always cryin' just that way over every
little thing," sighed the old man.

Edith eventually conquered the difficulties of bread making, and became
a famous cook. But she did not please her husband's father any the
better by this achievement.

"You're always a-fixin' up some new sort of trash for the table," he
said to her one day. "_Dessert_ is it, you call it? 'Nuff to make a
man's patience _desert_ him to see sugar and flour wasted so. 'Liz'beth
liked your fancy cooking, but I cured her of it."

"Yes, and you killed her too," cried Edith, for the first time since her
marriage losing control of her temper and answering back. "Everybody
says you worried her into the grave. But you won't succeed so well with
me. I will live just to defy you, if no more. And I'll show you that
I'll not bear everything, too."

It was all over in a moment, and it was not repeated. Indeed, Edith was
kinder and gentler and more submissive in her manner after that for
days, as sweet natures always are when they have once broken over the
rules which govern their lives.

Yet the old man always spoke of Edith as a virago after that.

"She's worse'n 'Liz'beth," he said, "and she had a temper of her own at
times that would just _singe_ things."

Ben passed most of his evenings and a good part of his days at the
village "store." He came home the worse for drink occasionally, and he
was absolutely indifferent to all the work and care of the farm and
family.

"She's just like 'Liz'beth," the old man said to his neighbors; "she
don't make home entertainin' for her husband. But Ben isn't balanced
like me, and he goes wrong. He's excitable. I never was. The right kind
of a woman could keep him at home."

After a child came to them matters seemed to mend for a time. So long as
the infant lay pink and helpless in its mother's arms or in its crib, it
was a bond to unite them all.

So soon as it began to be an active child, with naughty ways which
needed correction, it was another element of discord.

The old man did not think Edith capable of controlling the child, and
Ben was hasty and harsh, and he did not like to hear the baby cry. So he
stayed more and more at the store, and was an object of fear to the
child and of reproach to the mother when he did return.

They drifted farther apart, and the old man constantly widened the
breach between them. They had been married six years, and the baby girl
was four years old, when Ben struck Edith a blow, one day, and told her
to take her child and leave the house.

In less than an hour she had gone, no one knew whither.

"She'll come back, more's the pity," the old man said. "'Liz'beth, she
started off to leave me once, but she concluded to come back and try it
over again."

But Edith did not come back. Months afterward they heard of her in a
distant part of the State teaching school and supporting her child.

Ben applied for a divorce on the plea of desertion. Edith never appeared
against him, and he obtained it.


III.

One year from the time Edith left him, he married Abby Wilson. She had
grown into a voluptuous though coarse maturity, and was dashing in dress
and manner. Her father had recently died, leaving her a fine property.
She had always coveted Ben, and did not delay the nuptials from any
sense of delicacy, but rather hastened the hour which should make him
legally her own.

The old man was highly pleased at the turn affairs had taken. After all
these years Ben was united to the woman he had chosen for him so long
ago, and now surely Ben would settle down, and take the care off his
shoulders--shoulders which were beginning to feel the weight of years of
labor. In truth, the old man was breaking down.

He fell ill of a low fever soon after Ben's second marriage, and when he
rose from his bed he seemed to have grown ten years older. He was more
childish in his fault-finding, and more irritable than ever before, and
this new wife of Ben's had little patience with him. She was not at all
like Edith. She bullied him, and frightened him into silence when he
began to find fault with her extravagances. For she was
extravagant--there was no denying that. She cared only for show and
outward appearance. She neglected her home duties, and often left the
old man to prepare his own food, while she and Ben dashed over the
country, or through the neighboring villages, behind the blooded span
she had insisted upon his purchasing soon after their marriage.

Poor old Anson English! He was nearing his sixtieth year now, and he
looked and seemed much older. Ben was his only earthly tie, and the hope
and stay of his old age. And he was but a reed--a reed. His father saw
that at last. Ben would never develop into a practical business man. He
was unstable, lazy, and selfish. And this new wife seemed to encourage
him in every extravagant folly, instead of restraining him as the old
man had hoped. And someway Ben had never been the same since Edith went
away. He had been none too good or kind to his father before that; but
since then--well, when she went, it seemed to Anson that she took with
her whatever of gentleness or kindness lurked in Ben's nature, and left
only its brutality and selfishness.

And strive as he would to banish the feeling, the old man missed the
child.

Ah, no! he was not happy in this new state of affairs, which he had so
rejoiced over at the first. He grew very old during the next two years.
Like all men who worry the lives of women in the domestic circle, he was
cowardly at heart. And Ben's new wife frightened him into silent
submission by her masculine assumption of authority and her loud voice
and well-defined muscle.

He spoke little at home now, but he still paid frequent visits to his
neighbors, and he remained firm in the Adam-like idea that Elizabeth had
been the root of all evil in his life.

"Yes, Ben's letting the place run down pretty bad," he confessed to a
neighbor who had broached the subject. "Ben's early trainin' wasn't
right. 'Liz'beth, she let him do 'bout as he pleased. Liz'beth never had
no notions of how a boy should be trained. He'd a' come out all right if
I'd a' managed him from the start."

Strange to say, he never was known to speak one disparaging word of
Abby, Ben's second wife. Her harshness and neglect were matters of
common discussion in the neighborhood, but the old man, who had been so
bitter and unjust toward his own wife and Edith, seemed to feel a
curious respect for this Amazon who had subjugated him. Or, perhaps, he
remembered how eager he had been for the marriage, and his pride kept
him silent. Certain it is that he bore her neglect, and later her abuse,
with no word of complaint, and even spoke of her sometimes with praise.

"She's a brave one, Abby is," he would say. "She ain't afraid of nothin'
or nobody. Ef she'd a' been a man, she'd a' made a noise in the world."

Ben drank more and more, and Abby dressed and drove in like ratio. The
farm ran down, and debts accumulated--debts which Abby refused to pay
with her money, and the old man saw the savings of a long life of labor
squandered in folly and vice.

People said it was turning his brain, for he talked constantly of his
poverty, often walking the streets in animated converse with himself.
And at length he fell ill again, and was wildly delirious for weeks. It
was a high fever; and when it left him, he was totally blind, and quite
helpless.

He needed constant care and attention. He could not be left alone even
for an hour; Ben was seldom at home, and Abby rebelled at the
confinement and restraint it imposed upon her. Hired help refused to
take the burden of the care of the troublesome old man without increased
wages, and Ben could not and Abby would not incur this added expense.
Servants gave warning; Ben drank more deeply and prolonged his absences
from home, and Abby finally carried out a resolve which had at first
caused even her hard heart some twinges.

She made an application to the keeper of the County Poor to admit her
husband's father to the department of the incurably insane, which was
adjacent to the Poor House.

"He's crazy," she said, "just as crazy as can be. We can't do anything
with him. He needs a strong man to look after him. Ben's never at home,
and he has everything to look after any way, and can't be broken of his
rest, and the old man talks and cries half the night. I'm not able to
take care of him--I seem to be breaking down myself, with all I have to
endure, and besides it isn't safe to have him in the house. I think he's
getting worse all the time. He'd be better off, and we all would, if he
was in the care of the county."

The authorities looked into the matter, and found that at least a
portion of the lady's statements were true. It was quite evident that
the old man would be better off in the County House than he was in the
home of his only son. So he was taken away, and Abby had her freedom at
last.

"We are going to take you where you will have medical treatment and
care; it is your daughter's request," they told him in answer to his
trembling queries.

"Oh! yes, yes--Abby thinks I'll get my sight back, I suppose, if I'm
doctored up. Well, maybe so, but I'm pooty old--pooty old for the
doctors to patch up. But Abby has a powerful mind to plan things--a
powerful mind. 'Liz'beth never would a' thought of sending me
away--'Liz'beth was so easy like. Abby ought to a' been a man, she had.
She'd a' flung things."

So he babbled on as they carried him to the Poor House.

It was November, and the holidays were close at hand. Thanksgiving,
Christmas, New Year. Abby meant to enjoy them, and invited all her
relatives to a time of general feasting and merrymaking.

"I feel as if a great nightmare were lifted off my heart and brain, now
the old man has gone," she said. "He will be so much better off, and get
so much more skillful treatment, you know, in a place like that. They
are very kind in that institution, and so clean and nice, and he will
have plenty of company to keep him from being lonesome. We have been
all through it, during the last year, or else we never should have sent
him there. It is really an excellent home for him."


IV.

It was just a year later when a delicate, sweet-faced woman was shown
through the wards of that "excellent home" for the poor and unfortunate.
She walked with nervous haste, and her eyes glanced from room to room,
and from face to face, as if seeking, yet dreading, some object.

Presently the attendant pushed open a partly closed door, which led into
a small, close room, ventilated only by one high, narrow window.

"This is the room, I believe," he said, and the lady stepped in--and
paused. The air was close and impure, and almost stifled her.

On the opposite side of the room she saw a large crib with a cover or
lid which could be closed and locked when necessary, but which was
raised now. In this crib, upon a hard mattress and soiled pillow, lay
the emaciated form of an old man. He turned his sightless eyes toward
the door as he heard the sound of footsteps.

"What is wanted?" he asked, feebly; "does anybody want me? Has anybody
come for me?"

"O father, father!" cried the woman in a voice choked with sobs. "Don't
you know me? It is I--and I have come to take you away--to take you away
home with me. Will you go?"

A glow of delight shone over the old man's wasted face, like the last
rays of the sunlight over a winter landscape. He half arose upon his
elbow, and leaned forward as if trying to see the speaker.

"Why, it's Abby, it's Abby, come at last!" he said. "You called me
father, didn't you--and you was crying, and it made your voice sound
kind o' strange and broken like. But you must be Abby come to take me
home. Oh, I thought you'd come at last, Abby. It seems a long, long time
since I came away. And you've never been to see me; no, nor Ben, either.
But you've come at last, Abby, you've come at last. Let me take your
hand, daughter, for I can't see yet. They don't seem to help me here as
you thought they would. And I'm _so hungry_, Abby!--do you think you
could manage to get the old man a little something to eat before we
start home?"

The woman had grown paler and paler as she listened to these words which
the old man poured out in eager haste, like one whose thoughts and
feelings long pent within himself for want of a listener now rushed
forth pell-mell into speech.

"He does not know me," she whispered--"he does not know me. Well, I will
not undeceive him now. He is happy in this delusion,--let him keep it
for the present." Then, aloud, she said:

"You are hungry, father? do you not have food enough here?"

"Oh, I have my share, Abby; I have my share. But my appetite's varying,
and sometimes when they bring it I can't eat it, and then when I want it
most I can't get it. I'm one of many here, and I've been so lonesome,
Abby. But then I knew you'd come for me all in good time. And, Ben--how
is Ben, Abby? does he want to see his old father again? Ah, Ben was a
nice little boy--a nice little boy. But 'Liz'beth wan't no kind of a
mother for such a high-strung lad. And then he hadn't oughter married
that sickly sort of girl that ran off an' left him. Sakes alive! what a
temper she had! It sort of broke Ben down living with her as long as he
did. But he remembers his old father at last, don't he? And he wants to
have me home to die. Ah, Ben has a good heart after all!"

"I must not tell him; I must not," whispered the woman as she listened.
"Bitter to me as his deception is, I must let him remain in it." Then
with a sudden bracing of the nerves, and a visible effort, she said:

"Ben is away from home now, father. He will not be there to meet you,
but you'll not mind that: I shall make you so comfortable; I want you at
home during the holidays."

So he went out from the horror and loneliness and gloom of the Poor
House, to the comfortable home which Edith had provided for herself and
child in the years since she left Ben. Eva was a precocious little
maiden of nine now, wise and womanly beyond her years. So soon as Edith
learned of the old man's desolate fate, she resolved to bring him home.
Eva could attend to his wants during the day, while she was in the
school-room, and the interrupted studies could be pursued in the
evening. Or she could hire assistance if he were as troublesome as
report had said. He had been a harsh old man, and had helped to widen
the breach between her and Ben. But he was the father of the man she had
married, and she could not let him die in the Poor House. So she brought
him home.

"Don't I hear a child's voice?" he asked, as Eva came dancing out to
greet them. "Who is it, Abby?"

"Why, it's your own little granddaughter Eva," cried the child, clasping
his withered hand in her two soft palms. "Don't you remember me? Mamma
says you used to love me."

Edith's heart stood still. Surely now he would understand. And would he
be angry and harsh with her?

The old man's face lighted.

"Ah, I see, I see," he said musingly, "Abby and Ben have taken the
little one home. It must be Edith is dead. She was such a puny thing."
Then turning his face to the woman who was guiding his faltering
footsteps, he asked:

"And is Edith dead?"

"Yes," she answered quietly, "Edith is dead." And added "to _you_," in a
whisper.

"He must never be undeceived," she thought. "It would be too severe a
blow; the truth might kill him." And to Eva she said a little later:

"Dear, your grandfather is very ill, and not quite right in his mind. He
thinks my name is Abby, and you must not correct him or dispute any
strange thing he may say."

The journey left the old man very weak indeed, but he talked almost
constantly.

"It was so good of you, Abby, to take the little girl home," he would
say. "But I knowed you had a good heart, and Ben too. He was fond of his
old father, spite of his rough ways. It was pooty lonesome--pooty
lonesome, off there at that place--that Institute where you sent me.
Some folks said it was the Poor House, but I knew better--I knew better.
Ben and you would never send me there. I s'pose it was a good place, but
they had too many patients. Sometimes I was cold and hungry and all
alone for hours and hours. Oh, it's good to be back home with you--you,
Abby--but why don't Ben come?"

"Ben is away, father."

"Oh, yes, yes. Business, I suppose. Ben'll turn out all right at last. I
always thought so. After he sort o' outgrows 'Liz'beth's trainin'. But I
hope he'll get back for Christmas. Somehow I've been thinkin' lately
'bout the Christmas days when Ben was a little boy. We allus put
something in his stockin' that night, no matter if twan't no more'n a
sweet cake. Sakes alive! how he prized things he found in his stockin'
Christmas mornin's! I got to thinkin' 'bout it all last Christmas out at
that there Institute, and I just laid an' bawled like a baby, I was so
home-sick like. Seemed to me if I could just _see_ Ben's face again, I'd
ask nothin' more of Heaven. And now I think if I can just hear his voice
again, it'll be enough. Do you think he'll git home for Christmas,
Abby?"

"I hope so, dear father, but I cannot tell." Edith answered softly, her
heart seeming to break in her breast as she listened.

She knew very well that Ben would not go across the street to see the
father he had deserted, and that she could never send for him to come to
_her_ house, to pay even a last visit of mercy.

"What will I do--how can I explain to him, when Christmas comes and Ben
does not appear?" she thought.

But the way was shown her by that great Peace-Maker who helps us out of
all difficulties at last.

Christmas Eve, the old man's constant chatter grew flighty and
incoherent. He talked of people and things unknown to Edith, and spoke
his mother's name many times. Then he fell asleep. In the morning he
seemed very weak, and his voice was fainter.

"Such a strange dream as I have had, 'Lis'beth," he said, as Edith put
her hand on his brow, and smoothed back the thin, white hair.

"Such a strange dream, I thought Ben had grown into a man, and had left
me alone--all alone to die. I'm so glad to be awake and find it isn't
true. How dark it is, and how long the night seems! To-morrow is
Christmas. Did you put something in Ben's stockings, 'Lis'beth? I have
forgotten."

"Yes," answered Edith, in a choked voice.

"And it's gettin' colder, 'Lis'beth. Hadn't you better look after Ben a
little? See if he's covered up well in his crib. You're so careless,
'Lis'beth, the boy'll take his death o' cold yet. And he's all I've
got. He'll make a fine man, a fine man if you don't spoil him,
'Lis'beth. But you hain't no real sense for trainin' a boy, somehow. Is
he covered up? It's bitter, bitter cold."

"He is well covered," Edith answered. The old man seemed to doze again.
Then he roused a little.

"It's dawn," he said. "I see the light breaking. Little Ben'll be
crawling out for his stockin' pooty quick: I oughter had the fire made
afore this, to warm his little toes. Strange you couldn't a' waked me,
'Liz'beth! You don't never seem to have no foresight."

Then the old man fell back on Edith's arm, dead.




THE CHRISTMAS GOBLINS.

BY CHARLES DICKENS.


In an old abbey town, a long, long while ago there officiated as sexton
and gravedigger in the churchyard one Gabriel Grubb. He was an ill
conditioned cross-grained, surly fellow, who consorted with nobody but
himself and an old wicker-bottle which fitted into his large, deep
waistcoat pocket.

A little before twilight one Christmas Eve, Gabriel shouldered his
spade, lighted his lantern, and betook himself toward the old
churchyard, for he had a grave to finish by next morning, and feeling
very low, he thought it might raise his spirits, perhaps, if he went on
with his work at once.

He strode along until he turned into the dark lane which led to the
churchyard--a nice, gloomy, mournful place into which the towns-people
did not care to go except in broad daylight, consequently he was not a
little indignant to hear a young urchin roaring out some jolly song
about a Merry Christmas. Gabriel waited until the boy came up, then
rapped him over the head with his lantern five or six times to teach him
to modulate his voice. And as the boy hurried away, with his hand to his
head, Gabriel Grubb chuckled to himself and entered the churchyard,
locking the gate behind him.

He took off his coat, put down his lantern, and getting into an
unfinished grave, worked at it for an hour or so with right good will.
But the earth was hardened with the frost, and it was no easy matter to
break it up and shovel it out. At any other time this would have made
Gabriel very miserable, but he was so pleased at having stopped the
small boy's singing that he took little heed of the scanty progress he
had made when he had finished work for the night, and looked down into
the grave with grim satisfaction, murmuring as he gathered up his
things:


     "Brave lodgings for one, brave lodgings for one,
     A few feet of cold earth when life is done."


"Ho! ho!" he laughed, as he set himself down on a flat tombstone, which
was a favorite resting-place of his, and drew forth his wicker-bottle.
"A coffin at Christmas! A Christmas box. Ho! ho! ho!"

"Ho! ho! ho!" repeated a voice close beside him.

"It was the echoes," said he, raising the bottle to his lips again.

"It was not," said a deep voice.

Gabriel started up and stood rooted to the spot with terror, for his
eyes rested on a form that made his blood run cold.

Seated on an upright tombstone close to him was a strange, unearthly
figure. He was sitting perfectly still, grinning at Gabriel Grubb with
such a grin as only a goblin could call up.

"What do you here on Christmas Eve?" said the goblin, sternly.

"I came to dig a grave, sir," stammered Gabriel.

"What man wanders among graves on such a night as this?" cried the
goblin.

"Gabriel Grubb! Gabriel Grubb!" screamed a wild chorus of voices that
seemed to fill the churchyard.

"What have you got in that bottle?" said the goblin.

"Hollands, sir," replied the sexton, trembling more than ever, for he
had bought it of the smugglers, and he thought his questioner might be
in the excise department of the goblins.

"Who drinks Hollands alone, and in a churchyard on such a night as
this?"

"Gabriel Grubb! Gabriel Grubb!" exclaimed the wild voices again.

"And who, then, is our lawful prize?" exclaimed the goblin, raising his
voice.

The invisible chorus replied, "Gabriel Grubb! Gabriel Grubb!"

"Well, Gabriel, what do you say to this?" said the goblin, as he grinned
a broader grin than before.

The sexton gasped for breath.

"What do you think of this, Gabriel?"

"It's--it's very curious, sir, very curious, sir, and very pretty,"
replied the sexton, half-dead with fright. "But I think I'll go back and
finish my work, sir, if you please."

"Work!" said the goblin, "what work?"

"The grave, sir."

"Oh! the grave, eh? Who makes graves at a time when other men are merry,
and takes a pleasure in it?"

Again the voices replied, "Gabriel Grubb! Gabriel Grubb!"

"I'm afraid my friends want you, Gabriel," said the goblin.

"Under favor, sir," replied the horror-stricken sexton, "I don't think
they can; they don't know me, sir; I don't think the gentlemen have ever
seen me."

"Oh! yes, they have. We know the man who struck the boy in the envious
malice of his heart because the boy could be merry and he could not."

Here the goblin gave a loud, shrill laugh which the echoes returned
twenty-fold.

"I--I am afraid I must leave you, sir," said the sexton, making an
effort to move.

"Leave us!" said the goblin; "ho! ho! ho!"

As the goblin laughed he suddenly darted toward Gabriel, laid his hand
upon his collar, and sank with him through the earth. And when he had
had time to fetch his breath he found himself in what appeared to be a
large cavern, surrounded on all sides by goblins ugly and grim.

"And now," said the king of the goblins, seated in the centre of the
room on an elevated seat--his friend of the churchyard--"show the man of
misery and gloom a few of the pictures from our great storehouses."

As the goblin said this a cloud rolled gradually away and disclosed a
small and scantily furnished but neat apartment. Little children were
gathered round a bright fire, clinging to their mother's gown, or
gamboling round her chair. A frugal meal was spread upon the table and
an elbow-chair was placed near the fire. Soon the father entered and the
children ran to meet him. As he sat down to his meal the mother sat by
his side and all seemed happiness and comfort.

"What do you think of that?" said the goblin.

Gabriel murmured something about its being very pretty.

"Show him some more," said the goblin.

Many a time the cloud went and came, and many a lesson it taught to
Gabriel Grubb. He saw that men who worked hard and earned their scanty
bread were cheerful and happy. And he came to the conclusion it was a
very respectable sort of a world after all. No sooner had he formed it
than the cloud closed over the last picture seemed to settle on his
senses and lull him to repose. One by one the goblins faded from his
sight, and as the last one disappeared he sank to sleep.

The day had broken when he awoke, and found himself lying on the flat
gravestone, with the wicker-bottle empty by his side. He got on his
feet as well as he could, and brushing the frost off his coat, turned
his face toward the town.

But he was an altered man, he had learned lessons of gentleness and
good-nature by his strange adventures in the goblin's cavern.




THE SONG OF THE STAR.

BY REV. C. H. MEAD.


"Oh, boys; you can count me out on that--all I can get goes to my mother
and sisters for Christmas."

The speaker was a manly little newsboy, with good features, a clean face
and bright eyes. His clothes looked neat, though they were adorned with
numerous patches.

"But see here, Will. Christmas only comes once a year, and why shouldn't
we fellers have our banquet as well as the silk-stockings? What would
they know about things going on in the world anyway, if we newsboys
didn't supply 'em with papers? All in favor of having a banquet, hold up
yer hands!"

Up went a score of hands--some dirty, some clean and some speckled, but
Will's hand remained down. "See here, Will, what's the reason you won't
stay by us?"

The boy hesitated a moment and then said: "Boys, it's mighty close times
up at our house; fried chicken and pound cake don't come our way,
turkeys roost too high for us, and, and--well, boys, if you must know
it, about the only good thing we kids have up there is our mother's
love. See these patches! My mother put them on. See these stockings! My
mother has been mending this same pair of stockings for more than a
year, and she washes and irons them after I've gone to bed at night.
Every stitch of mother's needle and thread is a stitch of love, and one
night not long ago, I opened my eyes and saw my mother's tears dropping
on the sleeve of my coat at the same time she was putting the patch on
this elbow. I tell you, boys, the best thing I've got in the world is my
mother, and the best Christmas gift I ever had is my mother's love. If I
had a million dollars, I'd give them all to my mother in return for her
love. No, no, boys; no banquet for me, as long as I know my mother is
starving herself that we children may have more to eat."

"Well," replied one of the boys, "if I had a mother like that, maybe I'd
feel the same way; but all we get at our house is a good licking from a
drunken mother, and I'm going in for a square meal at Christmas, if I
never has another."

The boys, gathered on the sidewalk by one of the parks, were suddenly
startled by a cry "Look out there!" and the next moment a runaway horse
dashed into their midst; little Will was knocked over, and was soon
carried into a neighboring drug store, all unconscious of what had
happened. It was soon discovered that his arm was broken, and his body
bruised in a number of places. The moment he regained consciousness and
found what had occurred, he said:

"Take me to my mother; she will take care of me somehow, though this
isn't exactly the kind of a Christmas gift I meant she should have. Say,
boys, one of you go up to our house, and tell her easy about this; don't
burst in sudden and scare her, but tell her it isn't dangerous,
and--well, just tell her I love her."

The boys wiped their eyes and one of them said, "This busts up our
banquet, fellers; I'll go and tell Will's mother, and, say, fellers,
shan't I tell her we will give our banquet money to help her out at
Christmas?"

A hearty "You bet we will," was the response, as big Tom sped away to
carry the news to Will's mother, while kind hands helped carry the
injured boy to his home. It was a poor home into which he was borne,
but everything was as neat and tidy as could be. A woman stood at the
door, and it needed but one glance to know that she was the mother of
Will. Poverty and hunger had failed to rob her of her beauty, and there
was an air of refinement about her that told of better days and happier
surroundings.

"Christmas hasn't come yet, mother," said Will, "but I have. Don't you
worry; I'll come out of this all right, and we will have a good
Christmas yet."

The mother kissed him tenderly as she said, "No, I will not worry, so
long as I have God, and you, and Josie, and Maggie, and Tot. When
Christmas comes round, Will, it will be a good day whatever it brings."

"It will bring yer heaps of things, Mrs. Sandford," blurted out big Tom,
"for we fellers has given up havin' a banquet, and are going to bring
yer something that Will can't bring now. Don't yer worry a bit," and
here the rough fellow burst into tears, and rushed out of the house.

A few more days, and then Christmas Eve came round, and a bright night
it was. Will lay sleeping on the bed, his mother near by, pretending to
read, but in reality using the dear old Bible as a shield to hide the
tears that trickled down her cheeks. The mother was thinking, and
thinking fast, too. It was only a little over thirteen years since her
father had closed the door in her face and told her never to return. The
man she loved was not the fashionable fop her father had selected for
her as a husband, and secretly she had given her hand to the man to whom
long before she had given her heart. All went well, until three years
ago, when her husband died suddenly, and she found herself with no means
and four children to take care of. Too proud to apply to her father for
help, she struggled on as best she could, leaning hard on the God whom
her mother had taught her to love.

Her children were a comfort to her, for they had inherited the natural
goodness of both their parents. Her tears now fell fast, for as she
thought, she also listened to the voices of her two youngest children
who were standing over by the window together.

"Say, Maggie, does yer see dat bright star up dere? I wonder if dat is
de star what de shepherds seen! If it is, it seems to be looking right
down at us. Maybe Jesus is in dat star, and if He is, He won't forget
us, will He?"

And Tot looked at Maggie as the latter said: "Jesus loved little
children, Tot, when He was on the earth, and I guess He loves them yet.
That's a very bright star--it must be the one that was seen by the
shepherds at Bethlehem."

"I think so, too," said Tot, "and may be Josie will hear some of dem
'good tidings' while she is out. Oh! Maggie, Jesus must love mother; she
is so good, and I think He has sent that star to tell us to look out for
good news."

And where was Josie all this time? The mother thought she had gone into
a neighbor's, where she frequently went, and so felt no anxiety.

Out in the streets of the big city, side by side walked plenty and
poverty, wealth and wretchedness, happiness and hunger, gladness and
grief. Some carried bundles in their arms, while others carried burdens
in their hearts. Over all, the good God watched, and down upon all the
bright star shone. But what is that? Suddenly on one of the streets the
people stopped and listened. On the steps of a stoop leading up to a
lighted mansion stood a little girl who looked like a bright angel from
heaven. Far above, overhead, shone the bright star that Maggie and Tot
had seen; it was their star and it was her star, for Josie, too, had
discovered it, and somehow felt that the star that had brought "good
tidings of great joy" to the shepherds on Bethlehem's plains, had come
again and to bring once more "good tidings." She had mounted the steps
to get nearer the star, and then all unconscious of the people, in a
rich, sweet voice, she sang:--


     I think, when I read that sweet story of old,
       When Jesus was here among men;
     How He called little children, as lambs to His fold;
       I should like to have been with Him then.

     I wish that His hands had been placed on my head,
       That His arms had been thrown around me;
     That I might have seen His kind look, when He said,
       "Let the little ones come unto Me."


As she sang, her gaze was fixed on the star, and even her hands were
lifted toward it. The people looked at her; an angel had appeared in
their midst--her face, her voice, her upturned eyes, her uplifted hands,
held them spell-bound, until some one looking up in the direction she
pointed, cried out: "See that star!" Heavenward went the gaze of the
multitude, and once more there seemed to come to them a voice, saying:
"Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall
be to all people." The face of Josie was illumined and even the
multitude that had gathered, failed to alarm her. The star with its
"good tidings" was over her head and in her heart as well. "Who are you,
my child?" said a gentleman who had come up on the steps where she
stood. "Please, sir, I am Josie Sandford." The gentleman gave a start
and said, "Sandford, Josie Sandford? Pray where do you live, Josie?" She
told him, and in response to other questions, told of mother, brother
and sisters.

"Oh, sir; do you see the star? I am sure it has some 'good tidings' for
us at our house, and I must hurry home and tell mother all about it.
Good-bye."

Away sped the child until she reached her home, and then entering the
room quietly, she went up to her mother and said: "Have you seen the
star, mother?" Maggie and Tot cried out, "We've seen it; come, mother,
and look quick." The mother went quietly to the window, and there beheld
a star of wonderful brightness, and as she gazed, her face took on a new
light and into her heart came a great peace. The sleeping boy was
awakened by the voices, and he, too, made his way to the window and
looked at the star. "At evening time it shall be light."

It had come, and--something else had come, too, for steps were heard on
the stairs, followed by a knock on the door, on opening which, in came a
company of newsboys headed by big Tom. They bore bundles and baskets,
provisions and poultry, sunshine and sugar, toys and turnips, good-will
and grapes, cheer and celery, and things that no one but those who had
lacked for them, would ever have thought of. Big Tom was the spokesman
for the happy company.

"If yer please, Mrs. Sandford," he said, "there's our banquet. We wasn't
going to come until to-morrow morning, but when we got the things all
together, we just couldn't wait any longer, so we've brought 'em
to-night, and if it isn't too soon, ma'am, we wishes you, and Will, and
Josie, and Maggie, and Tot a 'Merry Christmas,' doesn't we, boys?"

"Indeed we does!" responded the boys. The faces of that mother and her
children were a sight to behold. Smiles and tears greeted the boys, and
the mother and her three girls had a kiss for each of them. Then Tot
said: "I knowed it. I knowed it! De star had Jesus in it, and I knowed
He see Maggie and me looking up at it."

"Well, boys," said Mrs. Sandford, "you shall have your banquet, for I
want you all to take Christmas dinner with us to-morrow."

"Yes, boys, you shall all take dinner with Mrs. Sandford and her
children to-morrow, but it must be at the home of her parents and not
here," said a gentleman who had not been noticed as he stood in the
hallway.

Mrs. Sandford started as the owner of the voice entered the room, and
little Josie sprang toward him at the same moment. She resembled her
mother and was her namesake as well. The gentleman stretched out his
arms toward Mrs. Sandford as he said to her:

"Josie, can you forgive me for the harshness with which I drove you
years ago from my door? God only knows how I have suffered, and for
years I have hunted high and low for you, and have advertised time and
again. But all was in vain, until to-night I saw your face and heard
your voice once more, as my grandchild, Josie, stood singing on the
steps and gazing at the star. In her I found you again, and oh, how your
mother and I have prayed for this time to come."

Long before he had finished, the daughter was in her father's arms once
more, and the children were clinging to their new-found grandparent. The
newsboys looked on in wonder, and suddenly little Tot ran to the window
and then cried out--"Oh, grandpa, the star is here yet, and it shines
brighter than before," and she threw a kiss up to the star.

Christmas morning came and found them all in a home of plenty. A chair
that had long stood vacant at that table, was once more filled, and
near it were four other chairs for the new-found grand-children. Was it
a "Merry Christmas," did you inquire? Just ask those newsboys who came
at two o'clock if they ever had such a banquet before or since, or
whether they ever saw a home in which the "Star of Bethlehem" shone with
greater splendor. And over the earth the star still shines, and will
continue to shine until all mankind shall yet have a "Merry Christmas."




INDIAN PETE'S CHRISTMAS GIFT.

BY HERBERT W. COLLINGWOOD.


The moon was just peeping over the pines as Pete Shivershee slunk down
the road from the lumber camp into the forest. Pete did not present a
surpassingly dignified appearance as he skulked through the clearing,
but he was not a very dignified person even at his best.

Most persons would have said, I think, that Pete's method of departure
was hardly appropriate for one who had been selected by the citizens of
Carter's Camp to go on an important mission. But Pete had his own
reasons for his actions. He crept along behind the stumps and logs till
he reached the forest. Then, as if the shadow gave him fresh courage and
dignity, he drew himself upright, and started at a sharp trot down the
road toward the village.

We have said that Pete had reasons for his conduct. They were good ones.
In the first place, he was an Indian. Not a "noble son of the forest,"
such as Cooper loved to picture, but a mean, dirty, yellow-faced
"_Injun_." Lazy and worthless, picking up a living about the lumber
camps, working as little as he could, and eating and drinking as much as
possible: such was the messenger. The mission was worse yet.

It was Christmas Eve. The snow covered the ground, and the ice had
stilled for the time the mouth of the roaring river. It was Saturday
night as well; and for some time past the lumbermen had been considering
the advisability of keeping the good old holiday with some form of
celebration suited to the occasion.

The citizens of Carter's Camp were not remarkably fastidious. They knew
but one form of celebration, and they had no thought of hunting out new
ones. The one thing needful to make a celebration completely successful
was--liquor. This they must have in order to do justice to the day.

The temperance laws of Carter's were very strict. Not that the moral
sentiment of the place was particularly high, but it had been noticed
that the amounts of labor and whisky were in inverse proportion. The
more whisky, the less labor. It was a pure question of political
economy. The foreman had often stated that he would prosecute to the
fullest extent of the law the first man caught bringing whisky into
camp. The foreman did not attempt, perhaps, to deny that his knowledge
of the law was somewhat crude. He had forcibly stated, however, that
should a case be brought before him, he would himself act as judge and
jury, while his fist and foot would take the place of witness and
counsel. There was something so terrible in this statement, coming as it
did from the largest man in camp, that very little whisky had thus far
been brought in.

Christmas had come, and the drinking element in Carter's Camp proposed
that Pete Shivershee--the "Injun"--be sent to town for a quantity of the
liquid poison, that the drinkers might "enjoy" themselves.

Bill Gammon found Pete curled up by the stove. He took him out of doors
and explained the business in hand. Bill prided himself somewhat on his
ability to "git work out of Injuns." Pete muttered only "all right." He
took the money Bill gave him, and then slunk away down the road for the
forest, as we have seen him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bill felt so confident of the success of his experiment that he did not
hesitate to inform the boys that Pete was "dead sure" to return. He
would stake his reputation upon it.

Pete was in a hard position. If he loved anything in this world, it was
whisky. If there was anything he feared, it was Bill's fist. The two
were sure to go together. The money jingling in his pocket suggested
unlimited pleasures, but over every one hung Bill's hard fist. He ran
several miles through the forest, till, turning a corner of the road, he
came upon a little clearing, in which stood a small log house. Pete knew
the place well. Here lived Jeff Hunt with his wife, a French woman, and
their troop of children.

Jeff was a person of little importance by the side of his wife, though,
like all "lords of creation," he considered himself the legal and proper
head of the family, as well as one of the mainstays of society. His part
of the family government consisted, for the most part, in keeping the
house supplied with wood and water, and in smoking his comfortable pipe
in the corner, while his wife bent over her tub.

Mrs. Hunt was the only woman near the camp, and so all the laundry work
fell to her. Laundry work in the pine woods implies mending and darning,
as well as washing and ironing, and the poor little woman had her hands
full of work surely. It was rub, rub, rub, day after day, over the
steaming tub, with the children running about like little wolves, and
Jeff kindly giving his advice from his comfortable corner. And even
after the children were in bed at night, she must sit up and mend the
clean clothes.

What a pack of children there were! How rough and strong they seemed,
running about all day, all but poor little Marie, the oldest. She had
never been strong, and now at last she was dying of consumption. She
could not sit up at all, but lay all day on the little bed in the
corner, watching her mother with sad, beautiful eyes.

The brave little Frenchwoman's heart almost failed her at times, as she
saw how day by day the little form grew thinner, the eyes more
beautiful, the cheeks more flushed. She knew the signs too well, but
there was nothing she could do.

Pete was a regular visitor at Jeff's and always a welcome one. His work
was to carry the washing to and from camp. He came nearer to feeling
like a man at Jeff's house than at any other place he knew of. Everyone
but Mrs. Hunt and little Marie called him only "Injun," but they always
said "Mr. Shivershee." The "Meester Shivershee" of the little
Frenchwoman was the nearest claim to respectability that Pete felt able
to make. One night while carrying home the clothes, he dropped them in
the mud. He never minded the whipping Bill Gammon gave him half as much
as he did poor Mrs. Hunt's tears, to think how her work had gone for
nothing.

As Pete came trotting down the road, Jeff stood in front of his house
chopping stove-wood from a great log. A lantern, hung on a stump,
provided light for his purpose. Pete stopped from sheer force of habit
in front of the house, and Jeff, glad of any chance to interrupt his
work, paused to talk with him.

"Walk in, Injun," said Jeff, hospitably. "Yer clo'es ain't quite ready,
but the woman will hev 'em all up soon--walk in."

It suddenly came over Pete that this was his night for taking the
clothes home, but his present errand was of far more importance than
mere laundry work.

"Me no stop. I goin' ter town. Great work. Large bizness." By which
vague hints he meant no doubt to impress Jeff with a sense of the
dignity of his mission, and yet cunningly to keep its object concealed.

"Goin' to town, be ye? Great doin's ter camp ter-morrer, I s'pose. I'll
be round ef I kin git away, but walk in, Injun, an' git yer supper, an'
see the wimmin," and Jeff opened the door for Pete to pass in.

The thought of supper was too much for Pete and he slunk in after Jeff
and stood in the corner by the door. The room was hardly an inviting
one, and yet if Pete had been a white man some thoughts of "home, sweet
home," must have passed through his mind. But he was only a despised
"Injun."

A rough board table was laid for supper at one side of the room. In the
corner little Marie lay with the firelight falling over her poor thin
face. Pete must have felt, as he looked at her, like some hopeless
convict gazing through his prison bars upon some fair saint passing
before him. She seemed to be in another world than his; there seemed
between them a gulf that could not be bridged. Three of the larger
children were sobbing in the corner, while the rest formed a sorrowful
group about an old box in which were two or three simple plants frozen
and yellow. Mrs. Hunt was frying pork over the hot stove. As she looked
up at Pete, he noticed that she had been crying.

Jeff was the very prince of hosts. He made haste to make Pete feel at
home.

"Set by, Injun. So the boys is goin' ter kinder cellybrate ter-morrer,
be they?"

But Pete felt that his mission must not be disclosed. "What matter is
with kids?" he asked, to change the subject.

"Oh, they're jest a-yellin' about them flowers," explained Jeff. "Ye see
they hev been a-trainin' some posies indoors against ter-morrer, ye
know. Ter-morrer's Christmas, ye see, an' them kids they hed an idee
they'd hev some flowers fer ter dekerate thet corner where the little
gal is. Little gals, when they ain't well, like sech things, ye know."

Pete nodded. He was not aware of this love of diminutive females, but it
would not show very good breeding to appear ignorant.

"Wall, ye see," continued Jeff, "they kep the flowers away from the
little gal, meanin' ter s'prise her like. But jest this afternoon they
gut ketched by the frost, an' now there they be stiffer'n stakes. It is
kinder bad, ain't it--'specially ez it's Christmas, too?"

"What Crissmus?" put in Pete.

"Oh, Christmas? Wall, it's a sorter _day_ like. It's somethin' like
other days, an' yet it ain't. But then, Injun, I don't s'pose ye would
understand ef I wuz ter tell ye." And Jeff concealed his own ignorance,
as many wiser and better men have done, by assuming a tone too lofty for
his audience.

But Mrs. Hunt could explain, even if Jeff could not. She paused on the
way to the stove with a dish of pork in her hand.

"It eez the day of the good Lord, Meester Shivershee. It eez the day
when the good Lord He was born, and when all people should be glad." But
the little woman belied her own creed as she thought of little Marie and
the dead flowers.

I hardly think Pete gained a very clear idea of the day, even from Mrs.
Hunt's explanation. It was, I fear, all Greek to him.

"What flowers fer?" he asked, as, in response to Jeff's polite
invitation, he "sat by" and began supper.

"Wall, it's a sorter idee of the wimmin," explained Jeff. "Looks kinder
pooty to see flowers round; ye see, kinder slicks up a room like. All
these things hez ter come inter keepin' house, ye see, Injun." With
which broad explanation Jeff helped himself to a piece of pork.

But Mrs. Hunt was bound to explain too. Her explanation was certainly
more poetic.

"It eez the way we show our love for the good Lord, Meester Shivershee.
What is more beautiful than the flowers? We take the flowers, and with
much love we place them upon the walls, and we make others happy with
them, and the good Lord, who loves us all, He is pleased,"--but here,
seeing the sobbing children and the frozen plants, she could not help
wiping her eyes upon her apron.

The little sufferer on the bed saw this action. Her voice was almost
gone. "Never mind, mamma," she whispered; but the beautiful eyes were
filled with tears, for she knew that mamma _would_ mind--that she could
not help it.

Pete listened to all this attentively. "Injun" that he was, of course he
could not understand it all, and yet he could hardly help seeing
something of the sorrow that the loss of the flowers had brought upon
the family. He finished his supper, and then slunk out at the door
again. Jeff followed him out.

"Little gal ever git well?" asked Pete.

"No; I don't s'pose she will," answered Jeff. "There ain't no hopes held
out fer her. Makes it kinder bad, ye see. Nice, clever little gal as
ever lived, too. Stop in an' git yer clo'es when ye come back, will ye?"

"All right," muttered Pete, as he trotted away toward the town.

       *       *       *       *       *

I wonder what Pete was thinking about as he ran through the forest. An
"Injun's" thoughts on any ordinary subject cannot be very deep, yet when
one comes from such a scene as Pete had just witnessed, and when such
sad eyes as Marie's haunt one all along a lonely road, even an
"Injun's" thoughts must be worth noticing. Let us imagine what Pete's
thoughts were as he shuffled mile after mile through the snow. The scene
he had just left rose before his dulled "Injun" mind. How kind Mrs. Hunt
had always been to him! She was the only one that called him "Mister."
How queer it was that the children should cry because the flowers were
killed! How little Marie had looked at him! Somehow Pete could not drive
those sad eyes away. They seemed to be looking at him from every stump,
from every tree. They were filled with tears now--could it be because
the flowers were frozen?

It is no wonder that when at last the few lingering village lights came
into view, Pete was wondering how he could help matters out.

It was quite late, and most of the shops were closed. Only here and
there some late worker showed a light. The bar-rooms were open full
blast, and as Pete glided down the sawdust street it needed all the
remembrance of Bill's fist to keep him from parting with a portion of
the jingling money for an equal amount of good cheer. But the fist had
the best of it, and he went straight on to the last bar-room. Surely
Bill was right. Nothing but a miracle could stop him.

But the miracle was performed, and when Pete least expected it.

Pete knew better than to go into the front door of the bar-room. He knew
how well he and all his race are protected by the government. It had
been decided that no one should be allowed to sell liquor to an
"Injun"--at least at the regular bar. If an "Injun," however, could so
far lose sight of his personal dignity as to come sneaking in at the
back door, and pay an extra price for his liquor, whose business was it?

Pete knew the way of bar-tenders. He had been in the business before. He
did not go in at the front door where the higher-bred white men were
made welcome, but slunk down an alley by the side of the building,
meaning to go in the back way.

There was no light in the store next the bar-room. It was a milliner's
store and had been closed for some hours. But in the back room two women
were working away anxious to finish a hat, evidently intended for some
village belle's Christmas. Pete stopped in the dark alley for a moment
to watch them.

A man sat asleep in a chair by the stove, but the women worked on with
tireless fingers. The hat was growing more and more brilliant under
their quick touches. By their side stood a basket of artificial flowers
and bright ribbons. It seemed to Pete that he had never before seen
anything so beautiful. Here were flowers--why could he not get some for
the little sick girl?

It was a severe struggle for the poor "Injun," out there in the dark
alley. The thought of the thrashing he would receive on the one hand,
and the sad eyes of Marie on the other. What could he do? But even an
"Injun" can remember a kindness. It may have been a miracle, or it may
have been just the out-cropping of the desire to repay a kindness which
even an "Injun" is said to possess. At any rate the eyes conquered and
Pete braved the fist of Bill. For fear that he should lose courage, he
pushed against the door of the room, and entered without ceremony.

There was a great commotion, I can assure you. The idea of an "Injun"
pushing his way into the back parlor of a milliner's shop was too much
of a revolutionary proceeding to pass unnoticed. The women dropped their
work with a little scream, while the man started from his chair with
most violent intent upon poor Pete.

"What be ye after here, Injun?" he growled. "Hump yerself outer
here--git a-goin'!"

But Pete pulled out his money, at the sight of which the standing army
of the milliner's store paused. Money has smoothed over many an outrage.
It might perhaps excuse even such an action on the part of an "Injun."

"I want flowers," Pete said, pointing to the basket. "Give me flowers--I
pay."

"Oh, ye wanter buy sum of them artyficial flowers, do ye? This is a
pooty time o' night ter come flower huntin,' ain't it? Jest pick out yer
flowers, an' then climb out!"--and he held the basket out at arm's
length for Pete to select.

Pete took a great red rose, and a white flower. There was not very much
of a stock to select from, but Pete, with "Injun" instinct, selected the
largest and gaudiest.

"Them is wurth about ten shillins," figured up the merchant, taking the
money from Pete's hand.

Pete carefully placed the flowers in the pocket of his ragged coat, and
started for the door. The milliner's man, rendered affable by the most
surprising bargain he had just made, naturally wished to retain the
patronage of such a model customer.

"Want anything in our line, Injun, jest call round an' we'll please ye.
Only come a little afore bed-time when ye come again." But Pete slunk
out at the door and did not hear him.

Pete's money was nearly gone, but he had a scheme in his head. He slunk
in at the back door of the bar-room, and obtained his jug, and what
whiskey he could buy with the rest of his money. Then up the street he
ran again, out of town, stopping only once at the pump to fill the jug
to the top with water. Resolutely fastening in the stopper, and not even
raising the jug to his mouth, he started for camp at his long, swinging
trot, with the jug in his hand. Mile after mile was passed over, yet
Pete did not stop till Jeff Hunt's cabin came in sight. Hiding his jug
behind a log, he crept up to the window and looked in.

The light was burning on the table, while Mrs. Hunt sat nodding over her
work. She had been mending the clothes so that Pete could take them back
with him. Tired out, she had fallen asleep. The box of frozen plants
still stood by the table. Pete grinned as he saw them, thinking of the
great flowers in his pocket. Marie was asleep. Over her head were hung
long clusters of moss, with masses of ground pine and red berries.

Pete stole to the door and went in. Mrs. Hunt woke with a start, but at
sight of Pete smiled in her weary way. Pete made up his bundle of
clothes, and then pulled out the great red rose and the white flower. He
laid them on the table with--"Flowers fer little gal. Sick. Make her
think Crissmus. Good flowers. All color. No fade. No smell. No wear
out." Then, catching up his bundle, he slunk away without waiting for
Mrs. Hunt's thanks.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Bill Gammon woke in the morning, he found the jug at the foot of
his bunk. But Pete was nowhere to be seen. He had left the jug and fled.

The Christmas celebration at Carter's was a very tame affair. Many were
the curses showered upon Pete, and had that worthy been present, I doubt
if even the thought of the famous miracle would have sustained him in
the beating he would have received. But if Pete's conduct produced such
a sad effect upon the festivities at Carter's, the joy it caused at Jeff
Hunt's cabin made matters even. The glad Christmas sun, glad with the
promise of the "old, old story," came dancing and sparkling over the
trees, and looked down in wonderful tenderness upon the humble cabin.
The first bright beams fell upon the bed where little Marie was lying.
They showed her the rose and the white flower nestling in the
evergreens. The children came and stood in wonder before the rude
flowers. How wonderful they were! Where could they have come from?

The face of the little girl was more patient than before. The eyes
seemed more tender, and yet not so sad. Perhaps the glad sun, the same
good sun that had looked upon that far-away tomb from which the stone
had rolled, whispered to her, as it played about her face, how soon the
stone would roll from her life; how soon she would forget all her care
and trouble, and enter the land of sunshine and flowers. It may be that
the good old Christmas sun even hunted out poor despised Pete, and told
him something of its happiness. I am sure he deserved it. Let us hope so
at any rate.




MY CHRISTMAS DINNER.


It was on the twentieth of December last that I received an invitation
from my friend, Mr. Phiggins, to dine with him in Mark Lane, on
Christmas Day. I had several reasons for declining this proposition. The
first was that Mr. P. makes it a rule, at all these festivals, to empty
the entire contents of his counting-house into his little dining parlor;
and you consequently sit down to dinner with six white-waistcoated
clerks, let loose upon a turkey. The second was that I am not
sufficiently well read in cotton and sugar, to enter with any spirit
into the subject of conversation. And the third was, and is, that I
never drink Cape wine. But by far the most prevailing reason remains to
be told. I had been anticipating for some days, and was hourly in the
hope of receiving, an invitation to spend my Christmas Day in a most
irresistible quarter. I was expecting, indeed, the felicity of eating
plum-pudding with an angel; and, on the strength of my imaginary
engagement, I returned a polite note to Mr. P., reducing him to the
necessity of advertising for another candidate for Cape and turkey.

The twenty-first came. Another invitation--to dine with a regiment of
roast-beef eaters, at Clapham. I declined this also, for the above
reason, and for one other, _viz._, that, on dining there ten Christmas
Days ago, it was discovered, on sitting down, that one little
accompaniment of the roast beef had been entirely overlooked. Would it
be believed!--but I will not stay to mystify--I merely mention the fact.
They had forgotten the horseradish.

The next day arrived, and with it a neat epistle, sealed with
violet-colored wax, from Upper Brook street. "Dine with the ladies--at
home on Christmas Day." Very tempting, it is true; but not exactly the
letter I was longing for. I began, however, to debate within myself upon
the policy of securing this bird in hand, instead of waiting for the two
that were still hopping about the bush, when the consultation was
suddenly brought to a close, by a prophetic view of the portfolio of
drawings fresh from boarding-school--moths and roses on embossed
paper;--to say nothing of the album, in which I stood engaged to write
an elegy on a Java sparrow, that had been the favorite in the family for
three days. I rung for gilt-edged, pleaded a world of polite regret, and
again declined.

The twenty-third dawned; time was getting on rather rapidly; but no card
came. I began to despair of any more invitations, and to repent of my
refusals. Breakfast was hardly over, however, when the servant brought
up--not a letter--but an aunt and a brace of cousins from Bayswater.
They would listen to no excuse; consanguinity required me, and Christmas
was not my own. Now my cousins kept no albums; they are really as pretty
as cousins can be; and when violent hands, with white kid gloves, are
laid on one, it is sometimes difficult to effect an escape with becoming
elegance. I could not, however, give up my darling hope of a pleasanter
prospect. They fought with me in fifty engagements--that I pretended to
have made. I showed them the Court Guide, with ten names
obliterated--being those of persons who had _not_ asked me to mince-meat
and mistletoe; and I ultimately gained my cause by quartering the
remains of an infectious fever on the sensitive fears of my aunt, and by
dividing a rheumatism and a sprained ankle between my sympathetic
cousins.

As soon as they were gone, I walked out, sauntering involuntarily in
the direction of the only house in which I felt I could spend a "happy"
Christmas. As I approached, a porter brought a large hamper to the door.
"A present from the country," thought I, "yes, they _do_ dine at home;
they must ask me; they know that I am in town." Immediately afterward a
servant issued with a letter; he took the nearest way to my lodgings,
and I hurried back by another street to receive the so-much-wished-for
invitation. I was in a state of delirious delight.

I arrived--but there was no letter. I sat down to wait, in a spirit of
calmer enjoyment than I had experienced for some days; and in less than
half an hour a note was brought to me. At length, the desired despatch
had come; it seemed written on the leaf of a lily with a pen dipped in
dew. I opened it--and had nearly fainted with disappointment. It was
from a stock-broker, who begins an anecdote of Mr. Rothschild before
dinner, and finishes it with the fourth bottle--and who makes his eight
children stay up to supper and snap-dragon. In macadamizing a stray
stone in one of his periodical puddings, I once lost a tooth, and with
it an heiress of some reputation. I wrote a most irritable apology, and
despatched my warmest regards in a whirlwind.

December the twenty-fourth--I began to count the hours, and uttered many
poetical things about the wings of Time. Alack! no letter came;--yes, I
received a note from a distinguished dramatist, requesting the honor,
etc. But I was too cunning for this, and practiced wisdom for once. I
happened to reflect that his pantomime was to make its appearance on the
night after, and that his object was to perpetrate the whole programme
upon me. Regret that I could not have the pleasure of meeting Mr. Paulo,
and the rest of the _literati_ to be then and there assembled, was of
course immediately expressed.

My mind became restless and agitated. I felt, amidst all these
invitations, cruelly neglected. They served, indeed, but to increase my
uneasiness, as they opened prospects of happiness in which I could take
no share. They discovered a most tempting dessert, composed of forbidden
fruit. I took down "Childe Harold," and read myself into a sublime
contempt of mankind. I began to perceive that merriment is only malice
in disguise, and that the chief cardinal virtue is misanthropy.

I sat "nursing my wrath," till it scorched me; when the arrival of
another epistle suddenly charmed me from this state of delicious
melancholy and delightful endurance of wrong. I sickened as I surveyed,
and trembled as I opened it. It was dated----, but no matter; it was not
_the_ letter. In such a frenzy as mine, raging to behold the object of
my admiration condescend, not to _eat_ a custard, but to render it
invisible--to be invited perhaps to a tart fabricated by her own
ethereal fingers; with such possibilities before me, how could I think
of joining a "friendly party,"--where I should inevitably sit next to a
deaf lady, who had been, when a little girl, patted on the head by
Wilkes, or my Lord North, she could not recollect which--had taken tea
with the author of "Junius," but had forgotten his name--and who once
asked me "whether Mr. Munden's monument was in Westminster Abbey or St.
Paul's?"--I seized a pen, and presented my compliments. I hesitated--for
the peril of precariousness of my situation flashed on my mind; but hope
had still left me a straw to catch at, and I at length succeeded in
resisting this late and terrible temptation.

After the first burst of excitement, I sunk into still deeper
despondency. My spirit became a prey to anxiety and remorse. I could not
eat; dinner was removed with unlifted covers. I went out. The world
seemed to have acquired a new face; nothing was to be seen but raisins
and rounds of beef. I wandered about like Lear--I had given up all! I
felt myself grated against the world like a nutmeg. It grew dark--I
sustained a still gloomier shock. Every chance seemed to have expired,
and everybody seemed to have a delightful engagement for the next day. I
alone was disengaged--I felt like the Last Man! To-morrow appeared to
have already commenced its career; mankind had anticipated the future;
"and coming mince pies cast their shadows before."

In this state of desolation and dismay, I called--I could not help
it--at the house to which I had so fondly anticipated an invitation, and
a welcome. My protest must here however be recorded, that though I
called in the hope of being asked, it was my fixed determination not to
avail myself of so protracted a piece of politeness. No: my triumph
would have been to have annihilated them with an engagement made in
September, payable three months after date. With these feelings, I gave
an agitated knock--they were stoning the plums, and did not immediately
attend. I rung--how unlike a dinner bell it sounded! A girl at length
made her appearance, and, with a mouthful of citron, informed me that
the family had gone to spend their Christmas Eve in Portland Place. I
rushed down the steps, I hardly knew whither. My first impulse was to go
to some wharf and inquire what vessels were starting for America. But it
was a cold night--I went home and threw myself on my miserable couch. In
other words, I went to bed.

I dozed and dreamed away the hours till day-break. Sometimes I fancied
myself seated in a roaring circle, roasting chestnuts at a blazing log:
at others, that I had fallen into the Serpentine while skating, and that
the Humane Society were piling upon me a Pelion, or rather a Vesuvius
of blankets. I awoke a little refreshed. Alas! it was the twenty-fifth
of the month--It was Christmas Day! Let the reader, if he possess the
imagination of Milton, conceive my sensations.

I swallowed an atom of dry toast--nothing could calm the fever of my
soul. I stirred the fire and read Zimmermann alternately. Even
reason--the last remedy one has recourse to in such cases--came at
length to my relief: I argued myself into a philosophic fit. But,
unluckily, just as the Lethean tide within me was at its height, my
landlady broke in upon my lethargy, and chased away by a single word all
the little sprites and pleasures that were acting as my physicians, and
prescribing balm for my wounds. She paid me the usual compliment, and
then--"Do you dine at home to-day, sir?" abruptly inquired she. Here was
a question. No Spanish inquisitor ever inflicted such complete dismay in
so short a sentence. Had she given me a Sphynx to expound, a Gordian
tangle to untwist; had she set me a lesson in algebra, or asked me the
way to Brobdingnag; had she desired me to show her the North Pole, or
the meaning of a melodrama:--any or all of these I might have
accomplished. But to request me to define my dinner--to inquire into its
latitude--to compel me to fathom that sea of appetite which I now felt
rushing through my frame--to ask me to dive into futurity, and become
the prophet of pies and preserves!--My heart died within me at the
impossibility of a reply.

She had repeated the question before I could collect my senses around
me. Then, for the first time it occurred to me that, in the event of my
having no engagement abroad, my landlady meant to invite me! "There will
at least be the two daughters," I whispered to myself; "and after all,
Lucy Matthews is a charming girl, and touches the harp divinely. She has
a very small, pretty hand, I recollect; only her fingers are so
punctured by the needle--and I rather think she bites her nails. No, I
will not even now give up my hope. It was yesterday but a straw--to-day
it is but the thistledown; but I will cling to it to the last moment.
There are still four hours left; they will not dine till six. One
desperate struggle, and the peril is past; let me not be seduced by this
last golden apple, and I may yet win my race." The struggle was made--"I
should not dine at home." This was the only phrase left me, for I could
not say that "I should dine out." Alas! that an event should be at the
same time so doubtful and so desirable. I only begged that if any letter
arrived, it might be brought to me immediately.

The last plank, the last splinter, had now given way beneath me. I was
floating about with no hope but the chance of something almost
impossible. They had "left me alone," not with my glory, but with an
appetite that resembled an avalanche seeking whom it might devour. I had
passed one dinnerless day, and half of another; yet the promised land
was as far from sight as ever. I recounted the chances I had missed. The
dinners I might have enjoyed, passed in a dioramic view before my eyes.
Mr. Phiggins and his six clerks--the Clapham beef-eaters--the charms of
Upper Brook street--my pretty cousins, and the pantomime writer--the
stock broker, whose stories one forgets, and the elderly lady who
forgets her stories--they all marched by me, a procession of
apparitions. Even my landlady's invitation, though unborn, was not
forgotten in summing up my sacrifices. And for what?

Four o'clock. Hope was perfectly ridiculous. I had been walking upon the
hair-bridge over a gulf, and could not get into Elysium after all. I had
been catching moonbeams, and running after notes of music. Despair was
my only convenient refuge; no chance remained, unless something should
drop from the clouds. In this last particular I was not disappointed;
for, on looking up, I perceived a heavy shower of snow, yet I was
obliged to venture forth; for being supposed to dine out, I could not of
course remain at home. Where to go I knew not: I was like my first
father--"the world was all before me." I flung my coat round me, and
hurried forth with the feelings of a bandit longing for a stiletto. At
the foot of the stairs, I staggered against two or three smiling
rascals, priding themselves upon their punctuality. They had just
arrived--to make the tour of Turkey. How I hated them!--As I rushed by
the parlor, a single glance disclosed to me a blazing fire, with Lucy
and several lovely creatures in a semi-circle. Fancy, too, gave me a
glimpse of a sprig of mistletoe--I vanished from the house, like a
spectre at day-break.

How long I wandered about is doubtful. At last I happened to look
through a kitchen window, with an area in front, and saw a villain with
a fork in his hand, throwing himself back in his chair choked with
ecstasy. Another was feasting with a graver air; he seemed to be
swallowing a bit of Paradise, and criticising its flavor. This was too
much for mortality--my appetite fastened upon me like an alligator. I
darted from the spot; and only a few yards further discerned a house
with rather an elegant exterior, and with some ham in the window that
looked perfectly sublime. There was no time for consideration--to
hesitate was to perish. I entered; it was indeed "a banquet-hall
deserted." The very waiters had gone home to their friends. There,
however, I found a fire; and there--to sum up all my folly and felicity
in a single word--I DINED.




THE POOR TRAVELER.

BY CHARLES DICKENS.

     [Dickens' introduction to this story describes his going to
     Rochester on Christmas Eve and seeing there a quaint old charity,
     which provided for the entertainment of "six poor travelers who not
     being rogues or proctors might receive gratis for one night
     lodging, entertainment and fourpence each." In honor of the day a
     special meal is provided for the travelers then in the charity.
     After the meal, when the travelers have gathered around the fire,
     their entertainer gives them the reason for the unwonted feast as
     "Christmas Eve, my friends, when the Shepherds, who were poor
     travelers, too, in their way, heard the Angels sing, 'On earth,
     peace: Good will toward men.'" Then each traveler was invited to
     relate a story, and among those told was the following.]


In the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-nine, a relative of
mine came limping down, on foot, to the town of Chatham. He was a poor
traveler, with not a farthing in his pocket.

My relative came down to Chatham to enlist in a cavalry regiment, if a
cavalry regiment would have him; if not, to take King George's shilling
from any corporal or sergeant who would put a bunch of ribbons in his
hat. His object was to get shot; but he thought he might as well ride to
death as be at the trouble of walking.

My relative's Christian name was Richard, but he was better known as
Dick. He dropped his own surname on the road down, and took up that of
Doubledick. He was passed as Richard Doubledick; age, twenty-two;
height, five foot ten; native place, Exmouth, which he had never been
near in his life. There was no cavalry in Chatham when he limped over
the bridge with half a shoe to his dusty feet, so he enlisted into a
regiment of the line, and was glad to get drunk and forget all about it.

You are to know that this relative of mine had gone wrong, and run wild.
His heart was in the right place, but it was sealed up. He had been
betrothed to a good and beautiful girl, whom he had loved better than
she--or perhaps even he--believed; but in an evil hour he had given her
cause to say to him solemnly, "Richard, I will never marry any other
man. I will live single for your sake, but Mary Marshall's lips"--her
name was Mary Marshall--"never address another word to you on earth. Go,
Richard! Heaven forgive you!" This finished him. This brought him down
to Chatham. This made him Private Richard Doubledick, with a
determination to be shot.

There was not a more dissipated and reckless soldier in Chatham
barracks, in the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-nine, than
Private Richard Doubledick. He associated with the dregs of every
regiment; he was as seldom sober as he could be, and was constantly
under punishment. It became clear to the whole barracks that Private
Richard Doubledick would very soon be flogged.

Now the Captain of Richard Doubledick's company was a young gentleman
not above five years his senior, whose eyes had an expression in them
which affected Private Richard Doubledick in a very remarkable way. They
were bright, handsome, dark eyes,--what are called laughing eyes
generally, and, when serious, rather steady than severe,--but they were
the only eyes now left in his narrowed world that Private Richard
Doubledick could not stand. Unabashed by evil report and punishment,
defiant of everything else and everybody else, he had but to know that
those eyes looked at him for a moment, and he felt ashamed. He could
not so much as salute Captain Taunton in the street like any other
officer. He was reproached and confused,--troubled by the mere
possibility of the Captain's looking at him. In his worst moments, he
would rather turn back, and go any distance out of his way, than
encounter those two handsome, dark, bright eyes.

One day, when Private Richard Doubledick came out of the Black hole,
where he had been passing the last eight and forty hours, and in which
retreat he spent a good deal of his time, he was ordered to betake
himself to Captain Taunton's quarters. In the stale and squalid state of
a man just out of the Black hole, he had less fancy than ever for being
seen by the Captain; but he was not so mad yet as to disobey orders, and
consequently went up to the terrace overlooking the parade-ground, where
the officers' quarters were; twisting and breaking in his hands, as he
went along, a bit of the straw that had formed the decorative furniture
of the Black hole.

"Come in!" cried the Captain, when he knocked with his knuckles at the
door. Private Richard Doubledick pulled off his cap, took a stride
forward, and felt very conscious that he stood in the light of the dark,
bright eyes.

There was a slight pause. Private Richard Doubledick had put the straw
in his mouth, and was gradually doubling it up into his windpipe and
choking himself.

"Doubledick," said the Captain, "do you know where you are going to?"

"To the devil, sir," faltered Doubledick.

"Yes," returned the Captain. "And very fast."

Private Richard Doubledick turned the straw of the Black hole in his
mouth, and made a miserable salute of acquiescence.

"Doubledick," said the Captain, "since I entered his Majesty's service,
a boy of seventeen, I have been pained to see many men of promise going
that road; but I have never been so pained to see a man determined to
make the shameful journey as I have been, ever since you joined the
regiment, to see you."

Private Richard Doubledick began to find a film stealing over the floor
at which he looked; also to find the legs of the Captain's
breakfast-table turning crooked, as if he saw them through water.

"I am only a common soldier, sir," said he. "It signifies very little
what such a poor brute comes to."

"You are a man," returned the Captain, with grave indignation, "of
education and superior advantages; and if you say that, meaning what you
say, you have sunk lower than I had believed. How low that must be, I
leave you to consider, knowing what I know of your disgrace, and seeing
what I see."

"I hope to get shot soon, sir," said Private Richard Doubledick; "and
then the regiment and the world together will be rid of me."

The legs of the table were becoming very crooked. Doubledick, looking up
to steady his vision, met the eyes that had so strong an influence over
him. He put his hand before his own eyes, and the breast of his
disgrace-jacket swelled as if it would fly asunder.

"I would rather," said the young Captain, "see this in you, Doubledick,
than I would see five thousand guineas counted out upon this table for a
gift to my good mother. Have you a mother?"

"I am thankful to say she is dead, sir."

"If your praises," returned the Captain, "were sounded from mouth to
mouth through the whole regiment, through the whole army, through the
whole country, you would wish she had lived to say, with pride and joy,
'He is my son!'"

"Spare me, sir," said Doubledick. "She would never have heard any good
of me. She would never have had any pride and joy in owning herself my
mother. Love and compassion she might have had, and would have always
had, I know; but not--Spare me, sir! I am a broken wretch, quite at your
mercy!" And he turned his face to the wall, and stretched out his
imploring hand.

"My friend--" began the Captain.

"God bless you, sir!" sobbed Private Richard Doubledick.

I have heard from Private Richard Doubledick's own lips, that he dropped
down upon his knee, kissed that officer's hand, arose, and went out of
the light of the dark, bright eyes, an altered man.

In that year, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-nine, the French
were in Egypt, in Italy, in Germany, where not? Napoleon Bonaparte had
likewise begun to stir against England in India, and most men could read
the signs of the great troubles that were coming on. In the very next
year, when we formed an alliance with Austria against him. Captain
Taunton's regiment was on service in India. And there was not a finer
non-commissioned officer in it,--no, nor in the whole line,--than
Corporal Richard Doubledick.

       *       *       *       *       *

In eighteen hundred and one, the Indian army were on the coast of Egypt.
Next year was the year of the proclamation of the short peace, and they
were recalled. It had then become well known to thousands of men, that
wherever Captain Taunton, with the dark, bright eyes, led, there, close
to him, ever at his side, firm as a rock, true as the sun, and brave as
Mars, would be certain to be found, while life beat in their hearts,
that famous soldier, _Sergeant_ Richard Doubledick.

Eighteen hundred and five, besides being the great year of Trafalgar,
was a year of hard fighting in India. That year saw such wonders done by
a Sergeant-Major, who cut his way single-handed through a solid mass of
men, recovered the colors of his regiment, which had been seized from
the hand of a poor boy shot through the heart, and rescued his wounded
Captain, who was down, and in a very jungle of horses' hoofs and
sabres,--saw such wonders done, I say, by this brave Sergeant-Major,
that he was specially made the bearer of the colors he had won; and
_Ensign_ Richard Doubledick had risen from the ranks.

Sorely cut up in every battle, but always reinforced by the bravest of
men,--for the fame of following the old colors, shot through and
through, which Ensign Richard Doubledick had saved, inspired all
breasts,--this regiment fought its way through the Peninsular war, up to
the investment of Badajos in eighteen hundred and twelve. Again and
again it had been cheered through the British ranks until the tears had
sprung into men's eyes at the mere hearing of the mighty British voice,
so exultant in their valor; and there was not a drummer boy but knew the
legend, that wherever the two friends, Major Taunton, with the dark,
bright eyes, and Ensign Richard Doubledick, who was devoted to him, were
seen to go, there the boldest spirits in the English army became wild to
follow.

One day, at Badajos,--not in the great storming, but in repelling a hot
sally of the besieged upon our men at work in the trenches, who had
given way,--the two officers found themselves hurrying forward, face to
face, against a party of French infantry, who made a stand. There was an
officer at their head, encouraging his men,--a courageous, handsome,
gallant officer of five-and-thirty, whom Doubledick saw hurriedly,
almost momentarily, but saw well. He particularly noticed this officer
waving his sword, and rallying his men with an eager and excited cry,
when they fired in obedience to his gesture, and Major Taunton dropped.

It was over in ten minutes more, and Doubledick returned to the spot
where he had laid the best friend man ever had, on a coat spread upon
the wet clay. Major Taunton's uniform was opened at the breast, and on
his shirt were three little spots of blood.

"Dear Doubledick," said he, "I am dying."

"For the love of Heaven, no!" exclaimed the other, kneeling down beside
him, and passing his arm round his neck to raise his head. "Taunton! My
preserver, my guardian angel, my witness! Dearest, truest, kindest of
human beings! Taunton! For God's sake!"

The bright, dark eyes--so very, very dark, now, in the pale face--smiled
upon him; and the hand he had kissed thirteen years ago laid itself
fondly on his breast.

"Write to my mother. You will see home again. Tell her how we became
friends. It will comfort her, as it comforts me."

He spoke no more, but faintly signed for a moment toward his hair as it
fluttered in the wind. The Ensign understood him. He smiled again when
he saw that, and, gently turning his face over on the supporting arm as
if for rest, died, with his hand upon the breast in which he had revived
a soul.

No dry eye looked on Ensign Richard Doubledick that melancholy day. He
buried his friend on the field, and became a lone, bereaved man. Beyond
his duty he appeared to have but two remaining cares in life,--one, to
preserve the little packet of hair he was to give to Taunton's mother;
the other, to encounter that French officer who had rallied the men
under whose fire Taunton fell. A new legend now began to circulate
among our troops; and it was, that when he and the French officer came
face to face once more, there would be weeping in France.

The war went on--and through it went the exact picture of the French
officer on the one side, and the bodily reality upon the other--until
the battle of Toulouse was fought. In the returns sent home appeared
these words: "Severely wounded, but not dangerously, _Lieutenant_
Richard Doubledick."

At midsummer-time, in the year eighteen hundred and fourteen, Lieutenant
Richard Doubledick, now a browned soldier, seven-and-thirty years of
age, came home to England invalided. He brought the hair with him, near
his heart. Many a French officer had he seen since that day; many a
dreadful night, in searching with men and lanterns for his wounded, had
he relieved French officers lying disabled; but the mental picture and
the reality had never come together.

Though he was weak and suffered pain, he lost not an hour in getting
down to Frome in Somersetshire, where Taunton's mother lived. In the
sweet, compassionate words that naturally present themselves to the mind
to-night, "he was the only son of his mother, and she was a widow."

It was a Sunday evening, and the lady sat at her quiet garden-window,
reading the Bible; reading to herself, in a trembling voice, that very
passage in it, as I have heard him tell. He heard the words: "Young man,
I say unto thee, arise!"

He had to pass the window; and the bright, dark eyes of his debased time
seemed to look at him. Her heart told her who he was; she came to the
door quickly, and fell upon his neck.

"He saved me from ruin, made me a human creature, won me from infamy and
shame. O God, forever bless him! As He will, He will!"

"He will!" the lady answered. "I know he is in heaven!" Then she
piteously cried, "But O my darling boy, my darling boy!"

Never from the hour when Private Richard Doubledick enlisted at Chatham
had the Private, Corporal, Sergeant, Sergeant-Major, Ensign, or
Lieutenant breathed his right name, or the name of Mary Marshall, or a
word of the story of his life, into any ear except his reclaimer's. That
previous scene in his existence was closed. He had firmly resolved that
his expiation should be to live unknown; to disturb no more the peace
that had long grown over his old offences; to let it be revealed, when
he was dead, that he had striven and suffered, and had never forgotten;
and then, if they could forgive him and believe him--well, it would be
time enough--time enough!

But that night, remembering the words he had cherished for two years,
"Tell her how we became friends. It will comfort her, as it comforts
me," he related everything. It gradually seemed to him as if in his
maturity he had recovered a mother; it gradually seemed to her as if in
her bereavement she had found a son. During his stay in England, the
quiet garden into which he had slowly and painfully crept, a stranger,
became the boundary of his home; when he was able to rejoin his regiment
in the spring, he left the garden, thinking was this indeed the first
time he had ever turned his face toward the old colors with a woman's
blessing!

He followed them--so ragged, so scarred and pierced now, that they would
scarcely hold together--to Quatre Bras and Ligny. He stood beside them,
in an awful stillness of many men, shadowy through the mist and drizzle
of a wet June forenoon, on the field of Waterloo. And down to that hour
the picture in his mind of the French officer had never been compared
with the reality.

The famous regiment was in action early in the battle, and received its
first check in many an eventful year, when he was seen to fall. But it
swept on to avenge him, and left behind it no such creature in the world
of consciousness as Lieutenant Richard Doubledick.

Through pits of mire and pools of rain; along deep ditches, once roads,
that were pounded and ploughed to pieces by artillery, heavy wagons,
tramp of men and horses, and the struggle of every wheeled thing that
could carry wounded soldiers; jolted among the dying and the dead, so
disfigured by blood and mud as to be hardly recognizable for humanity;
dead, as to any sentient life that was in it, and yet alive,--the form
that had been Lieutenant Richard Doubledick, with whose praises England
rang, was conveyed to Brussels. There it was tenderly laid down in
hospital; and there it lay, week after week, through the long, bright
summer days, until the harvest, spared by war, had ripened and was
gathered in.

Slowly laboring, at last, through a long, heavy dream of confused time
and place, presenting faint glimpses of army surgeons whom he knew, and
of faces that had been familiar to his youth,--dearest and kindest among
them, Mary Marshall's, with a solicitude upon it more like reality than
anything he could discern,--Lieutenant Richard Doubledick came back to
life. To the beautiful life of a calm autumn evening sunset, to the
peaceful life of a fresh, quiet room with a large window standing open;
a balcony beyond, in which were moving leaves and sweet-smelling
flowers; beyond, again, the clear sky, with the sun full in his sight,
pouring its golden radiance on his bed.

It was so tranquil and so lovely that he thought he had passed into
another world. And he said in a faint voice, "Taunton, are you near me?"

A face bent over him. Not his, his mother's.

"I came to nurse you. We have nursed you many weeks. You were moved here
long ago. Do you remember nothing?"

"Nothing."

The lady kissed his cheek, and held his hand, soothing him.

"Where is the regiment? What has happened? Let me call you mother. What
has happened, mother?"

"A great victory, dear. The war is over, and the regiment was the
bravest in the field."

His eyes kindled, his lips trembled, he sobbed, and the tears ran down
his face. He was very weak, too weak to move his hand.

From that time, he recovered. Slowly, for he had been desperately
wounded in the head, and had been shot in the body, but making some
little advance every day. When he had gained sufficient strength to
converse as he lay in bed, he soon began to remark that Mrs. Taunton
always brought him back to his own history. Then he recalled his
preserver's dying words, and thought, "It comforts her."

One day he awoke out of a sleep, refreshed, and asked her to read to
him. But the curtain of the bed, softening the light, which she always
drew back when he awoke, that she might see him from her table at the
bedside where she sat at work, was held undrawn; and a woman's voice
spoke, which was not hers.

"Can you bear to see a stranger?" it said softly. "Will you like to see
a stranger?"

"Stranger!" he repeated. The voice awoke old memories, before the days
of Private Richard Doubledick.

"A stranger now, but not a stranger once," it said in tones that
thrilled him. "Richard, dear Richard, lost through so many years, my
name--"

He cried out her name "Mary," and she held him in her arms, and his
head lay on her bosom.

       *       *       *       *       *

Well! They were happy. It was a long recovery, but they were happy
through it all. The snow had melted on the ground, and the birds were
singing in the leafless thickets of the early spring, when those three
were first able to ride out together, and when people flocked about the
open carriage to cheer and congratulate _Captain_ Richard Doubledick.

But even then it became necessary for the Captain, instead of returning
to England, to complete his recovery in the climate of Southern France.
They found a spot upon the Rhône, within a ride of the old town of
Avignon, and within view of its broken bridge, which was all they could
desire; they lived there, together, six months; then returned to
England. Mrs. Taunton, growing old after three years--though not so old
as that her bright, dark eyes were dimmed--and remembering that her
strength had been benefited by the change, resolved to go back for a
year to those parts. So she went with a faithful servant, who had often
carried her son in his arms; and she was to be rejoined and escorted
home, at the year's end, by Captain Richard Doubledick.

She wrote regularly to her children (as she called them now), and they
to her. She went to the neighborhood of Aix; and there, in their own
château near the farmer's house she rented, she grew into intimacy with
a family belonging to that part of France. The intimacy began in her
often meeting among the vineyards a pretty child, a girl with a most
compassionate heart, who was never tired of listening to the solitary
English lady's stories of her poor son and the cruel wars. The family
were as gentle as the child, and at length she came to know them so well
that she accepted their invitation to pass the last month of her
residence abroad under their roof. All this intelligence she wrote home,
piecemeal as it came about, from time to time; and at last enclosed a
polite note, from the head of the château, soliciting, on the occasion
of his approaching mission to that neighborhood, the honor of the
company of that man so justly celebrated, Captain Richard Doubledick.

Captain Doubledick, now a hardy, handsome man in the full vigor of life,
broader across the chest and shoulders than he had ever been before,
dispatched a courteous reply, and followed it in person. Traveling
through all that extent of country after three years of peace, he
blessed the better days on which the world had fallen. The corn was
golden, not drenched in unnatural red; was bound in sheaves for food,
not trodden underfoot by men in mortal fight. The smoke rose up from
peaceful hearths, not blazing ruins. The carts were laden with the fair
fruits of the earth, not with wounds and death. To him who had so often
seen the terrible reverse, these things were beautiful indeed; and they
brought him in a softened spirit to the old château near Aix upon a deep
blue evening.

It was a large château of the genuine old ghostly kind, with round
towers, and extinguishers, and a high leaden roof, and more windows than
Aladdin's palace. The entrance doors stood open, as doors often do in
that country when the heat of the day is past; and the Captain saw no
bell or knocker, and walked in.

He walked into a lofty stone hall, refreshingly cool and gloomy after
the glare of a Southern day's travel. Extending along the four sides of
this hall was a gallery, leading to suites of rooms; and it was lighted
from the top. Still no bell was to be seen.

"Faith," said the Captain, halting, ashamed of the clanking of his
boots, "this is a ghostly beginning!"

He started back, and felt his face turn white. In the gallery, looking
down at him, stood the French officer--the officer whose picture he had
carried in his mind so long and so far. Compared with the original, at
last--in every lineament how like it was!

He moved and disappeared, and Captain Richard Doubledick heard his steps
coming quickly down into the hall. He entered through an archway. There
was a bright, sudden look upon his face, much such a look as it had worn
in that fatal moment.

Monsieur le Capitaine Richard Doubledick? Enchanted to receive him!

"He has not remembered me, as I have remembered him; he did not take
such a note of my face, that day, as I took of his," thought Captain
Richard Doubledick. "How shall I tell him?"

"You were at Waterloo," said the French officer.

"I was," said Captain Richard Doubledick. "And at Badajos."

Left alone with the sound of his own stern voice in his ears, he sat
down to consider. What shall I do, and how shall I tell him? At that
time, unhappily, many deplorable duels had been fought between English
and French officers arising out of the recent war; and these duels, and
how to avoid this officer's hospitality, were the uppermost thought in
Captain Richard Doubledick's mind.

"His mother, above all," the Captain thought. "How shall I tell _her_?"

"Spirit of my departed friend," said he, "is it through thee these
better thoughts are rising in my mind? Is it thou who hast shown me, all
the way I have drawn to meet this man, the blessings of the altered
time? Is it thou who hast sent thy stricken mother to me, to stay my
angry hand? Is it from thee the whisper comes, that this man did his
duty as thou didst,--and as I did, through thy guidance, which has
wholly saved me here on earth,--and that he did no more?"

He sat down, with his head buried in his hands, and, when he rose up,
made the second strong resolution in his life,--that neither to the
French officer, nor to the mother of his departed friend, nor to any
soul, while either of the two was living, would he breathe what only he
knew. And when he touched that French officer's glass with his own, that
day at dinner, he secretly forgave him in the name of the Divine
Forgiver of Injuries.




THE LEGEND OF THE CHRISTMAS TREE.


Most children have seen a Christmas tree, and many know that the pretty
and pleasant custom of hanging gifts on its boughs comes from Germany;
but perhaps few have heard or read the story that is told to little
German children, respecting the origin of this custom. The story is
called "The Little Stranger," and runs thus:

In a small cottage on the borders of a forest lived a poor laborer, who
gained a scanty living by cutting wood. He had a wife and two children
who helped him in his work. The boy's name was Valentine, and the girl
was called Mary. They were obedient, good children, and a great comfort
to their parents. One winter evening, this happy little family were
sitting quietly round the hearth, the snow and the wind raging outside,
while they ate their supper of dry bread, when a gentle tap was heard on
the window, and a childish voice cried from without: "Oh, let me in,
pray! I am a poor little child, with nothing to eat, and no home to go
to, and I shall die of cold and hunger unless you let me in."

Valentine and Mary jumped up from the table and ran to open the door,
saying: "Come in, poor little child! We have not much to give you, but
whatever we have we will share with you."

The stranger-child came in and warmed his frozen hands and feet at the
fire, and the children gave him the best they had to eat, saying: "You
must be tired, too, poor child! Lie down on our bed; we can sleep on the
bench for one night."

Then said the little stranger-child: "Thank God for all your kindness to
me!"

So they took their little guest into their sleeping-room, laid him on
the bed, covered him over, and said to each other: "How thankful we
ought to be! We have warm rooms and a cozy bed, while this poor child
has only heaven for his roof and the cold earth for his sleeping-place."

When their father and mother went to bed, Mary and Valentine lay quite
contentedly on the bench near the fire, saying, before they fell asleep:
"The stranger-child will be so happy to-night in his warm bed!"

These kind children had not slept many hours before Mary awoke and
softly whispered to her brother: "Valentine, dear, wake, and listen to
the sweet music under the window."

Then Valentine rubbed his eyes and listened. It was sweet music indeed,
and sounded like beautiful voices singing to the tones of a harp:


     "O holy Child, we greet thee! bringing
     Sweet strains of harp to aid our singing.

     "Thou, holy Child, in peace art sleeping,
     While we our watch without are keeping.

     "Blest be the house wherein thou liest.
     Happiest on earth, to heaven the highest."


The children listened, while a solemn joy filled their hearts; then they
stepped softly to the window to see who might be without.

In the east was a streak of rosy dawn, and in its light they saw a group
of children standing before the house, clothed in silver garments,
holding golden harps in their hands. Amazed at this sight, the children
were still gazing out of the window, when a light tap caused them to
turn round. There stood the stranger-child before them clad in a golden
dress, with a gleaming radiance round his curling hair. "I am the little
Christ-child," he said, "who wanders through the world bringing peace
and happiness to good children. You took me in and cared for me when you
thought me a poor child, and now you shall have my blessing for what you
have done."

A fir tree grew near the house; and from this he broke a twig, which he
planted in the ground, saying: "This twig shall become a tree, and shall
bring forth fruit year by year for you."

No sooner had he done this than he vanished, and with him the little
choir of angels. But the fir-branch grew and became a Christmas tree,
and on its branches hung golden apples and silver nuts every
Christmas-tide.

Such is the story told to German children concerning their beautiful
Christmas trees, though we know that the real little Christ-child can
never be wandering, cold and homeless, again in our world, inasmuch as
he is safe in heaven by his Father's side; yet we may gather from this
story the same truth which the Bible plainly tells us--that any one who
helps a Christian child in distress, it will be counted unto him as if
he had indeed done it unto Christ himself. "Inasmuch as ye have done it
unto the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me."




THE PEACE EGG.

BY JULIANA HORATIA EWING.


Every one ought to be happy at Christmas. But there are many things
which ought to be, and yet are not; and people are sometimes sad even in
the Christmas holidays.

The Captain and his wife were sad, though it was Christmas Eve. Sad,
though they were in the prime of life, blessed with good health, devoted
to each other and to their children, with competent means, a comfortable
house on a little freehold property of their own, and, one might say,
everything that heart could desire. Sad, though they were good people,
whose peace of mind had a firmer foundation than their earthly goods
alone; contented people, too, with plenty of occupation for mind and
body. Sad--and in the nursery this was held to be past all
reason--though the children were performing that ancient and most
entertaining play or Christmas mystery, known as "The Peace Egg," for
their benefit and behoof alone.

The play was none the worse that most of the actors were too young to
learn parts, so that there was very little of the rather tedious
dialogue, only plenty of dress and ribbons, and of fighting with the
wooden swords. But though Robert, the eldest of the five children,
looked bonny enough to warm any father's heart, as he marched up and
down with an air learned by watching many a parade in barrack-square and
drill ground, and though Nicholas did not cry in spite of falling hard,
and Dora, who took the part of the Doctor, treading accidentally on his
little finger in picking him up, still the Captain and his wife sighed
nearly as often as they smiled, and the mother dropped tears as well as
pennies into the cap which Tom, as the King of Egypt, brought round
after the performance.


II.

Many, many years back the Captain's wife had been a child herself, and
had laughed to see the village mummers act "The Peace Egg," and had been
quite happy on Christmas Eve. Happy, though she had no mother. Happy,
though her father was a stern man, very fond of his only child, but with
an obstinate will that not even she dared thwart. She had lived to
thwart it, and he had never forgiven her. It was when she married the
Captain. The old man had a prejudice against soldiers, which was quite
reason enough, in his opinion, for his daughter to sacrifice the
happiness of her future life by giving up the soldier she loved. At last
he gave her her choice between the Captain and his own favor and money.
She chose the Captain, and was disowned and disinherited.

The Captain bore a high character, and was a good and clever officer,
but that went for nothing against the old man's whim. He made a very
good husband too; but even this did not move his father-in-law, who had
never held any intercourse with him or his wife since the day of their
marriage, and who had never seen his own grand-children.

Amid the ups and downs of their wanderings, the discomforts of shipboard
and of stations in the colonies, bad servants, and unwonted sicknesses,
the Captain's tenderness never failed. If the life was rough the Captain
was ready. He had been, by turns, in one strait or another, sick-nurse,
doctor, carpenter, nursemaid and cook to his family, and had, moreover,
an idea that nobody filled these offices quite so well as himself.
Withal, his very profession kept him neat, well-dressed, and active. In
the roughest of their ever-changing quarters he was a smart man, and
never changed his manner from that of the lover of his wife's young
days.

As years went and children came, the Captain and his wife grew tired of
traveling. New scenes were small comfort when they heard of the death of
old friends. One foot of the dear, old, dull home sky was dearer, after
all, than miles of the unclouded heavens of the South. The grey hills
and over-grown lanes of her old home haunted the Captain's wife by night
and day, and home-sickness (that weariest of all sicknesses) began to
take the light out of her eyes before their time. It preyed upon the
Captain too. Now and then he would say, fretfully, "I _should_ like a
resting-place in our own country, however small, before _every_body is
dead! But the children's prospects have to be considered." The continued
estrangement from the old man was an abiding sorrow also, and they had
hopes that, if only they could get home, he might be persuaded to peace
and charity this time.

At last they were sent home. But the hard old father still would not
relent. He returned their letters unopened. This bitter disappointment
made the Captain's wife so ill that she almost died, and in one month
the Captain's hair became iron gray. He reproached himself for having
ever taken the daughter from her father, "to kill her at last," as he
said. And (thinking of his own children) he even reproached himself for
having robbed the old widower of his only child. After two years at home
his regiment was ordered again on foreign duty. He failed to effect an
exchange, and they prepared to move once more--from Chatham to Calcutta.
Never before had the packing to which she was so well accustomed, been
so bitter a task to the Captain's wife.

It was at the darkest hour of this gloomy time that the Captain came in,
waving above his head a letter which changed all their plans.

Now close by the old home of the Captain's wife there had lived a man,
much older than herself, who yet had loved her with a devotion as great
as that of the young Captain. She never knew it, for when he saw that
she had given her heart to his younger rival, he kept silence, and he
never asked for what he knew he might have had--the old man's authority
in his favor. So generous was the affection which he could never
conquer, that he constantly tried to reconcile the father to his
children whilst he lived, and, when he died, he bequeathed his house and
small estate to the woman he had loved.

"It will be a legacy of peace," he thought, on his death bed. "The old
man cannot hold out when she and her children are constantly in sight.
And it may please GOD that I shall know of the reunion I have not been
permitted to see with my eyes."

And thus it came about that the Captain's regiment went to India without
him, and that the Captain's wife and her father lived on opposite sides
of the same road.


III.

The eldest of the Captain's children was a boy. He was named Robert,
after his grandfather, and seemed to have inherited a good deal of the
old gentleman's character, mixed with gentler traits. He was a fair,
fine boy, tall and stout for his age, with the Captain's regular
features, and (he flattered himself) the Captain's firm step and martial
bearing. He was apt--like his grandfather--to hold his own will to be
other people's law, and (happily for the peace of the nursery) this
opinion was devoutly shared by his brother Nicholas. Though the Captain
had left the army, Robin continued to command an irregular force of
volunteers in the nursery, and never was colonel more despotic. His
brothers and sisters were by turn infantry, cavalry, engineers, and
artillery, according to his whim.

The Captain alone was a match for his strong-willed son.

"If you please, sir," said Sarah, one morning, flouncing in upon the
Captain, just as he was about to start for the neighboring town,--"If
you please, sir, I wish you'd speak to Master Robert. He's past my
powers."

"I've no doubt of it," thought the Captain, but he only said, "Well,
what's the matter?"

"Night after night do I put him to bed," said Sarah, "and night after
night does he get up as soon as I'm out of the room, and says he's
orderly officer for the evening, and goes about in his night-shirt and
his feet as bare as boards."

The Captain fingered his heavy moustache to hide a smile, but he
listened patiently to Sarah's complaints.

"It ain't so much _him_ I should mind, sir," she continued, "but he goes
round the beds and wakes up the other young gentlemen and Miss Dora, one
after another, and when I speak to him, he gives me all the sauce he can
lay his tongue to, and says he's going round the guards. The other night
I tried to put him back in his bed, but he got away and ran all over the
house, me hunting him everywhere, and not a sign of him, till he jumps
out on me from the garret stairs and nearly knocks me down. 'I've
visited the outposts, Sarah,' says he; 'all's well.' And off he goes to
bed as bold as brass."

"Have you spoken to your mistress?" asked the Captain.

"Yes, sir," said Sarah. "And missis spoke to him, and he promised not to
go round the guards again."

"Has he broken his promise?" asked the Captain, with a look of anger,
and also of surprise.

"When I opened the door last night, sir," continued Sarah, in her shrill
treble, "what should I see in the dark but Master Robert a-walking up
and down with the carpet-brush stuck in his arm. 'Who goes there?' says
he. 'You awdacious boy!' says I, 'Didn't you promise your ma you'd leave
off them tricks?' 'I'm not going round the guards,' says he; 'I promised
not. But I'm for sentry-duty to-night.' And say what I would to him, all
he had for me was, 'You mustn't speak to a sentry on duty.' So I says,
'As sure as I live till morning, I'll go to your pa,' for he pays no
more attention to his ma than to me, nor to any one else."

"Please to see that the bed is taken out of my dressing-room," said the
Captain. "I will attend to Master Robert."

With this Sarah had to content herself, and she went back to the
nursery. Robert was nowhere to be seen, and made no reply to her
summons. On this the unwary nursemaid flounced into the bed-room to look
for him, when Robert, who was hidden beneath a table, darted forth, and
promptly locked her in.

"You're under arrest," he shouted, through the keyhole.

"Let me out!" shrieked Sarah.

"I'll send a file of the guard to fetch you to the orderly-room,
by-and-by," said Robert, "for 'preferring frivolous complaints.'" And he
departed to the farmyard to look at the ducks.

That night, when Robert went up to bed, the Captain quietly locked him
into his dressing-room, from which the bed had been removed.

"You're for sentry duty, to-night," said the Captain. "The carpet-brush
is in the corner. Good-evening."

As his father anticipated, Robert was soon tired of the sentry game in
these new circumstances, and long before the night had half worn away he
wished himself safely undressed and in his own comfortable bed. At
half-past twelve o'clock he felt as if he could bear it no longer, and
knocked at the Captain's door.

"Who goes there?" said the Captain.

"Mayn't I go to bed, please?" whined poor Robert.

"Certainly not," said the Captain. "You're on duty."

And on duty poor Robert had to remain, for the Captain had a will as
well as his son. So he rolled himself up in his father's railway rug,
and slept on the floor.

The next night he was very glad to go quietly to bed, and remain there.


IV.

The Captain's children sat at breakfast in a large, bright nursery. It
was the room where the old bachelor had died, and now _her_ children
made it merry. This was just what he would have wished.

They all sat round the table, for it was breakfast-time. There were five
of them, and five bowls of boiled bread-and-milk smoked before them.
Sarah (a foolish, gossiping girl, who acted as nurse till better could
be found) was waiting on them, and by the table sat Darkie, the black
retriever, his long, curly back swaying slightly from the difficulty of
holding himself up, and his solemn hazel eyes fixed very intently on
each and all of the breakfast bowls. He was as silent and sagacious as
Sarah was talkative and empty-headed. Though large, he was unassuming.
Pax, the pug, on the contrary, who came up to the first joint of
Darkie's leg, stood defiantly on his dignity (and his short stumps). He
always placed himself in front of the bigger dog, and made a point of
hustling him in doorways and of going first downstairs.

Robert's tongue was seldom idle, even at meals. "Sarah, who is that tall
old gentleman at church, in the seat near the pulpit?" he asked. "He
wears a cloak like what the Blues wear, only all blue, and is tall
enough for a Life-guardsman. He stood when we were kneeling down, and
said, _Almighty and most merciful Father_, louder than anybody."

Sarah knew who the old gentleman was, and knew also that the children
did not know, and that their parents did not see fit to tell them as
yet. But she had a passion for telling and hearing news, and would
rather gossip with a child than not gossip at all. "Never you mind,
Master Robin," she said, nodding sagaciously. "Little boys aren't to
know everything."

"Ah, then, I know you don't know," replied Robert; "if you did, you'd
tell."

"I do," said Sarah.

"You don't," said Robin.

"Your ma's forbid you to contradict, Master Robin," said Sarah; "and if
you do I shall tell her. I know well enough who the old gentleman is,
and perhaps I might tell you, only you'd go straight off and tell
again."

"No, no, I wouldn't!" shouted Robin. "I can keep a secret, indeed I can!
Pinch my little finger, and try. Do, do tell me, Sarah, there's a dear
Sarah, and then I shall know you know." And he danced round her,
catching at her skirts.

To keep a secret was beyond Sarah's powers.

"Do let my dress be, Master Robin," she said, "you're ripping out all
the gathers, and listen while I whisper. As sure as you're a living boy,
that gentleman's your own grandpapa."

Robin lost his hold on Sarah's dress; his arms fell by his side, and he
stood with his brows knit for some minutes, thinking. Then he said,
emphatically, "What lies you do tell, Sarah!"

"Oh, Robin!" cried Nicholas, who had drawn near, his thick curls
standing stark with curiosity, "Mamma said 'lies' wasn't a proper word,
and you promised not to say it again."

"I forgot," said Robin, "I didn't mean to break my promise. But she does
tell--ahem!--_you know what_."

"You wicked boy!" cried the enraged Sarah; "how dare you say such a
thing, and everybody in the place knows he's your ma's own pa."

"I'll go and ask her," said Robin, and he was at the door in a moment;
but Sarah, alarmed by the thought of getting into a scrape herself,
caught him by the arm.

"Don't you go, love; it'll only make your ma angry. There; it was all my
nonsense."

"Then it's not true?" said Robin, indignantly. "What did you tell me so
for?"

"It was all my jokes and nonsense," said the unscrupulous Sarah, "But
your ma wouldn't like to know I've said such a thing. And Master Robert
wouldn't be so mean as to tell tales, would he, love?"

"I'm not mean," said Robin stoutly; "and I don't tell tales; but you do,
and you tell _you know what_, besides. However, I won't go this time;
but I'll tell you what--if you tell tales of me to papa any more, I'll
tell him what you said about the old gentleman in the blue cloak." With
which parting threat Robin strode off to join his brothers and sisters.


V.

After Robert left the nursery he strolled out of doors, and, peeping
through the gate at the end of the drive, he saw a party of boys going
through what looked like a military exercise with sticks and a good deal
of stamping; but, instead of mere words of command, they all spoke by
turns, as in a play. Not being at all shy, he joined them, and asked so
many questions that he soon got to know all about it. They were
practicing a Christmas mumming-play, called "The Peace Egg." Why it was
called thus they could not tell him, as there was nothing whatever about
eggs in it, and so far from being a play of peace, it was made up of a
series of battles between certain valiant knights and princes. The
rehearsal being over, Robin went with the boys to the sexton's house (he
was father to one of the characters called the "King of Egypt") where
they showed him the dresses they were to wear. These were made of
gay-colored materials, and covered with ribbons, except that of the
"Black Prince of Paradine," which was black, as became his title. The
boys also showed him the book from which they learned their parts, and
which was to be bought at the post-office store.

"Then are you the mummers who come round at Christmas, and act in
people's kitchens, and people give them money, that mamma used to tell
us about?" said Robin.

The boy hesitated a moment and then said, "Well, I suppose we are."

"And do you go out in the snow from one house to another at night; and
oh, don't you enjoy it?" cried Robin.

"We like it well enough," the lad admitted.

Robin bought a copy of "The Peace Egg." He was resolved to have a
nursery performance, and to take the chief part himself. The others
were willing for what he wished, but there were difficulties. In the
first place, there are eight characters in the play, and there were only
five children. They decided among themselves to leave out the "Fool,"
and Mamma said that another character was not to be acted by any of
them, or indeed mentioned; "the little one who comes in at the end,"
Robin explained. Mamma had her reasons, and these were always good. She
had not been altogether pleased that Robin had bought the play. It was a
very old thing, she said, and very queer; not adapted for a child's
play. If Mamma thought the parts not quite fit for the children to
learn, they found them much too long: so in the end she picked out some
bits for each, which they learned easily, and which, with a good deal of
fighting, made quite as good a story of it as if they had done the
whole. What may have been wanting otherwise was made up for by the
dresses, which were charming.

Robin was St. George, Nicholas the valiant Slasher, Dora the Doctor, and
the other two Hector and the King of Egypt. "And now we've no Black
Prince!" cried Robin in dismay.

"Let Darkie be the Black Prince," said Nicholas.

"When you wave your stick he'll jump for it, and then you can pretend to
fight with him."

"It's not a stick, it's a sword," said Robin.

"However, Darkie may be the Black Prince."

"And what's Pax to be?" asked Dora; "for you know he will come if Darkie
does, and he'll run in before everybody else too."

"Then he must be the Fool," said Robin, "and it will do very well, for
the Fool comes in before the rest, and Pax can have his red coat on, and
the collar with the little bells."


VI.

Robin thought that Christmas would never come. To the Captain and his
wife it seemed to come too fast. They had hoped it might bring
reconciliation with the old man, but it seemed they had hoped in vain.

There were times now when the Captain almost regretted the old
bachelor's bequest. The familiar scenes of her old home sharpened his
wife's grief. To see her father every Sunday in church, with marks of
age and infirmity upon him, but with not a look of tenderness for his
only child, this tried her sorely.

"She felt it less abroad," thought the Captain. "A home in which she
frets herself to death, is after all, no great boon."

Christmas Eve came.

"I'm sure it's quite Christmas enough now," said Robin. "We'll have 'The
Peace Egg' to-night."

So as the Captain and his wife sat sadly over their fire, the door
opened, and Pax ran in shaking his bells, and followed by the nursery
mummers. The performance was most successful. It was by no means
pathetic, and yet, as has been said, the Captain's wife shed tears.

"What is the matter, mamma?" said Robert, abruptly dropping his sword
and running up to her.

"Don't tease mamma with questions," said the Captain; "she is not very
well, and rather sad. We must all be very kind and good to poor dear
mamma;" and the Captain raised his wife's hand to his lips as he spoke.
Robin seized the other hand and kissed it tenderly. He was very fond of
his mother. At this moment Pax took a little run, and jumped on to
mamma's lap, where, sitting facing the company, he opened his black
mouth and yawned, with a ludicrous inappropriateness worthy of any
clown. It made everybody laugh.

"And now we'll go and act in the kitchen," said Nicholas.

"Supper at nine o'clock, remember," shouted the Captain. "And we are
going to have real frumenty and Yule cakes, such as mamma used to tell
us of when we were abroad."

"Hurray!" shouted the mummers, and they ran off, Pax leaping from his
seat just in time to hustle the Black Prince in the doorway. When the
dining-room door was shut, Robert raised his hand, and said "Hush!"

The mummers pricked their ears, but there was only a distant harsh and
scraping sound, as of stones rubbed together.

"They're cleaning the passages," Robert went on, "and Sarah told me they
meant to finish the mistletoe, and have everything cleaned up by
supper-time. They don't want us, I know. Look here, we'll go _real
mumming_ instead. That _will_ be fun!"

Nicholas grinned with delight.

"But will mamma let us?" he enquired.

"Oh, it will be all right if we're back by supper-time," said Robert,
hastily. "Only of course we must take care not to catch cold. Come and
help me to get some wraps."

The old oak chest in which spare shawls, rugs, and coats were kept was
soon ransacked, and the mummers' gay dresses hidden by motley wrappers.
But no sooner did Darkie and Pax behold the coats, etc., than they at
once began to leap and bark, as it was their custom to do when they saw
any one dressing to go out. Robin was sorely afraid that this would
betray them; but though the Captain and his wife heard the barking they
did not guess the cause.

So the front door being very gently opened and closed, the nursery
mummers stole away.


VII.

It was a very fine night. The snow was well-trodden on the drive, so
that it did not wet their feet, but on the trees and shrubs it hung soft
and white.

"It's much jollier being out at night than in the daytime," said Robin.

"Much," responded Nicholas, with intense feeling.

"We'll go a wassailing next week," said Robin. "I know all about it, and
perhaps we shall get a good lot of money, and then we'll buy tin swords
with scabbards for next year. I don't like these sticks. Oh, dear, I
wish it wasn't so long between one Christmas and another."

"Where shall we go first?" asked Nicholas, as they turned into the high
road.

"This is the first house," he said. "We'll act here;" and all pressed in
as quickly as possible. Once safe within the grounds, they shouldered
their sticks, and marched with composure.

"You're going to the front door," said Nicholas. "Mummers ought to go to
the back."

"We don't know where it is," said Robin, and he rang the front-door
bell. There was a pause. Then lights shone, steps were heard, and at
last a sound of much unbarring, unbolting, and unlocking. It might have
been a prison. Then the door was opened by an elderly, timid-looking
woman, who held a tallow candle above her head.

"Who's there?" she said, "at this time of night."

"We're Christmas mummers," said Robin, stoutly; "we didn't know the way
to the back door, but----"

"And don't you know better than to come here?" said the woman. "Be off
with you, as fast as you can."

"You're only the servant," said Robin. "Go and ask your master and
mistress if they wouldn't like to see us act. We do it very well."

"You impudent boy, be off with you!" repeated the woman. "Master'd no
more let you nor any other such rubbish set foot in this house----"

"Woman!" shouted a voice close behind her, which made her start as if
she had been shot, "who authorizes you to say what your master will or
will not do, before you've asked him? The boy is right. You _are_ the
servant, and it is not your business to choose for me whom I shall or
shall not see."

"I meant no harm, sir, I'm sure," said the housekeeper; "but I thought
you'd never----"

"My good woman," said her master, "if I had wanted somebody to think for
me, you're the last person I should have employed. I hire you to obey
orders, not to think."

"I'm sure, sir," said the housekeeper, whose only form of argument was
reiteration, "I never thought you would have seen them----"

"Then you were wrong," shouted her master. "I will see them. Bring them
in."

He was a tall, gaunt old man, and Robin stared at him for some minutes,
wondering where he could have seen somebody very like him. At last he
remembered. It was the old gentleman of the blue cloak.

The children threw off their wraps, the housekeeper helping them, and
chattering ceaselessly, from sheer nervousness.

"Well, to be sure," said she, "their dresses are pretty, too. And they
seem quite a better sort of children, they talk quite genteel. I might
ha' knowed they weren't like common mummers, but I was so flusterated
hearing the bell go so late, and----"

"Are they ready?" said the old man, who had stood like a ghost in the
dim light of the flaring tallow candle, grimly watching the proceedings.

"Yes, sir. Shall I take them to the kitchen, sir?"

"----for you and the other idle hussies to gape and grin at? No. Bring
them to the library," he snapped, and then stalked off, leading the way.

The housekeeper accordingly led them to the library, and then withdrew,
nearly falling on her face as she left the room by stumbling over
Darkie, who slipped in last like a black shadow.

The old man was seated in a carved oak chair by the fire.

"I never said the dogs were to come in," he said.

"But we can't do without them, please," said Robin, boldly. "You see
there are eight people in 'The Peace Egg,' and there are only five of
us; and so Darkie has to be the Black Prince, and Pax has to be the
Fool, and so we have to have them."

"Five and two make seven," said the old man, with a grim smile; "what do
you do for the eighth?"

"Oh, that's the little one at the end," said Robin, confidently. "Mamma
said we weren't to mention him, but I think that's because we're
children.--You're grown up, you know, so I'll show you the book, and you
can see for yourself," he went on, drawing "The Peace Egg" from his
pocket: "there, that's the picture of him, on the last page; black, with
horns and a tail."

The old man's stern face relaxed into a broad smile as he examined the
grotesque woodcut; but when he turned to the first page the smile
vanished in a deep frown, and his eyes shone like hot coals with anger.
He had seen Robin's name.

"Who sent you here?" he asked, in a hoarse voice. "Speak, and speak the
truth! Did your mother send you here?"

Robin thought the old man was angry with them for playing truant. He
said, slowly, "N--no. She didn't exactly send us; but I don't think
she'll mind our having come if we get back in time for supper. Mamma
never _forbid_ our going mumming, you know."

"I don't suppose she ever thought of it," Nicholas said candidly,
wagging his curly head from side to side.

"She knows we're mummers," said Robin, "for she helped us. When we were
abroad, you know, she used to tell us about the mummers acting at
Christmas, when she was a little girl; and so we thought we'd be
mummers, and so we acted to papa and mamma, and so we thought we'd act
to the maids, but they were cleaning the passages, and so we thought
we'd really go mumming; and we've got several other houses to go to
before supper-time; we'd better begin, I think," said Robin; and without
more ado he began to march round and round, raising his sword, and the
performance went off quite as creditably as before.

As the children acted the old man's anger wore off. He watched them with
an interest he could not repress. When Nicholas took some hard thwacks
from Robert without flinching, the old man clapped his hands; and after
the encounter was over, he said he would not have had the dogs excluded
on any consideration. It was just at the end, when they were all
marching round and round, holding on by each other's swords "over the
shoulder," and singing "A mumming we will go, etc.," that Nicholas
suddenly brought the circle to a stand-still by stopping dead short, and
staring up at the wall before him.

"What _are_ you stopping for?" said Robert, turning indignantly around.

"Look there!" cried Nicholas, pointing to a little painting which hung
above the old man's head.

Robin looked, and said abruptly, "It's Dora."

"Which is Dora?" asked the old man in a strange, sharp tone.

"Here she is," said Robin and Nicholas in one breath, as they dragged
her forward.

"She's the Doctor," said Robin, "and you can't see her face for her
things. Dor, take off your cap and pull back that hood. There! Oh, it
_is_ like her!"

It was the portrait of her mother as a child; but of this the nursery
mummers knew nothing. The old man looked as the peaked cap and hood fell
away from Dora's face and fair curls, and then he uttered a sharp cry,
and buried his head upon his hands. The boys stood stupefied, but Dora
ran up to him, and putting her little hands on his arms, said, in
childish pitying tones, "Oh, I am so sorry! Have you got a headache? May
Robin put the shovel in the fire for you? Mamma has hot shovels for her
headaches." And though the old man did not speak or move, she went on
coaxing him, and stroking his head, on which the hair was white. At this
moment Pax took one of his unexpected runs, and jumped on to the old
man's knee, in his own particular fashion, and then yawned at the
company. The old man was startled, and lifted his face suddenly. It was
wet with tears.

"Why, you're crying!" exclaimed the children with one breath.

"It's very odd," said Robin, fretfully. "I can't think what's the matter
to-night. Mamma was crying too when we were acting, and papa said we
weren't to tease her with questions, and he kissed her hand, and I
kissed her hand too. And papa said we must all be very good and kind to
poor dear mamma, and so I mean to be, she's so good. And I think we'd
better go home, or perhaps she'll be frightened," Robin added.

"She's so good, is she?" asked the old man. He had put Pax off his
knee, and taken Dora on to it.

"Oh, isn't she!" said Nicholas, swaying his curly head from side to side
as usual.

"She's always good," said Robin, emphatically; "and so's papa. But I'm
always doing something I oughtn't to," he added, slowly. "But then, you
know, I don't pretend to obey Sarah. I don't care a fig for Sarah; and I
won't obey any woman but mamma."

"Who's Sarah?" asked the grandfather.

"She's our nurse," said Robin, "and she tells--I mustn't say what she
tells--but it's not the truth. She told one about _you_ the other day,"
he added.

"About me?" said the old man.

"She said you were our grandpapa. So then I knew she was telling _you
know what_."

"How did you know it wasn't true?" the old man asked.

"Why, of course," said Robin, "if you were our mamma's father, you'd
know her, and be very fond of her, and come to see her. And then you'd
be our grandfather, too, and you'd have us to see you, and perhaps give
us Christmas-boxes. I wish you were," Robin added with a sigh. "It would
be very nice."

"Would _you_ like it?" asked the old man of Dora.

And Dora, who was half asleep and very comfortable, put her little arms
about his neck as she was wont to put them around the Captain's, and
said, "Very much."

He put her down at last, very tenderly, almost unwillingly, and left the
children alone. By-and-by he returned, dressed in the blue cloak, and
took Dora up again.

"I will see you home," he said.

The children had not been missed. The clock had only just struck nine
when there came a knock on the door of the dining-room, where the
Captain and his wife still sat by the Yule log. She said "Come in,"
wearily, thinking it was the frumenty and the Christmas cakes.

But it was her father, with her child in his arms!


VIII.

The Captain had many friends who knew of the sad estrangement between
his wife and her father. Some of them were in church the next day, which
was Christmas Day, when the Captain's wife came in. They would have hid
their faces, but for the startling sight that met the gaze of the
congregation. The old grandfather walked into church abreast of the
Captain.

"They've met in the porch," whispered one under the shelter of his hat.

"They can't quarrel publicly in a place of worship," said another,
turning pale.

"She's gone into his seat," cried a girl in a shrill whisper.

"And the children after her," added her sister, incautiously aloud.

There was now no doubt about the matter. The old man in his blue cloak
stood for a few moments politely disputing the question of precedence
with his handsome son-in-law. Then the Captain bowed and passed in, and
the old man followed him.

By the time that the service was ended everybody knew of the happy
peacemaking, and was glad. One old friend after another came up with
blessings and good wishes. This was a proper Christmas, indeed, they
said. There was a general rejoicing.

But only the grandfather and his children knew that it was hatched from
"The Peace Egg."



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BUDGET OF CHRISTMAS TALES BY
CHARLES DICKENS AND OTHERS***


******* This file should be named 28198-8.txt or 28198-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/8/1/9/28198



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
</doc>
<doc id="file28565806" filename="pg34034.txt" parent_folder="Literature" url="https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/34034/pg34034.txt">
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Belovéd Traitor, by Frank L. Packard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Belovéd Traitor

Author: Frank L. Packard

Release Date: October 4, 2010 [EBook #34034]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BELOVÉD TRAITOR ***




Produced by Al Haines









_The Belovéd Traitor_


BY

FRANK L. PACKARD


AUTHOR OF "THE MIRACLE MAN," "GREATER LOVE HATH NO MAN," ETC.



THE COPP, CLARK CO., LIMITED

TORONTO




COPYRIGHT, 1915

BY FRANK L. PACKARD




There is a Valley called the Valley of Illusion, but beyond it,
sun-crowned, is the Peak of Eternal Truth--and the Way from the Valley
to the Peak is sore beset, for the Way is the Understanding of Things
Real, and its Achievement is the Fullness of Life.




CONTENTS


BOOK I: BERNAY-SUR-MER

CHAPTER

    I  THE HOUSE ON THE BLUFF
   II  THE KEEPERS OF THE LIGHT
  III  THE BEACON
   IV  STRANGERS WITHIN THE GATES
    V  "WHO IS JEAN LAPARDE?"
   VI  THE GIFT
  VII  WHERE GLORY AWAITS
 VIII  SHADOWS BEFORE
   IX  FORKED ROADS
    X  A DAUGHTER OF FRANCE
   XI  THE PENDULUM


BOOK II: TWO YEARS LATER

    I  THE DUPLICITY OF FATHER ANTON
   II  26 RUE VANITAIRE
  III  IN THE DEAD OF THE NIGHT
   IV  THE ACCUSATION
    V  THE SECRET MODEL
   VI  "JEAN MUST NOT KNOW"
  VII  MEA CULPA
 VIII  FLIGHT
   IX  MYRNA'S STRATEGY
    X  THROUGH THE FOG
   XI  THE "DEATH" OF JEAN LAPARDE
  XII  AT THE "GATEWAY"
 XIII  DAWN
  XIV  THE STATUE OF DREAMS




The Belovéd Traitor


BOOK I: BERNAY-SUR-MER


-- I --

THE HOUSE ON THE BLUFF

It was a wilder gust than any that had gone before.  It tore along the
beach with maniacal fury; and, shrieking in a high, devilishly-gleeful
falsetto, while the joints of the little inn, rheumatic with age,
squeaked in its embrace, shook the Taverne du Bas Rhône much after the
fashion of a terrier shaking a rat.  And with that gust, loosening the
dilapidated fastening on the casement, a window crashed inward,
shattering the pane against the wall.

"_Sacré bleu!_" shouted a man, springing smartly to his feet from his
seat at a small table as the rain lashed him.  "What a dog of a night!"

Against the opposite wall, tilted back in a chair, Papa Fregeau, the
patron, a rotund, aproned little individual, stopped the humming of his
song.

"_Tiens!_" said he fatuously.  "But it is worse than that, Alcide,
since it is bad for business--hah!  Not a franc profit to-night--the
Bas Rhône is desolated."  And he resumed his song:

  "In Languedoc, where the wine flows free,
    We drink to----"


"Hold your bibulous tongue, Jacques Fregeau, and get something with
which to fix that window before we are as wet inside as you!"--it was
Madame Fregeau, stout, middle-aged and rosy, already hurrying to the
aid of the first speaker, who was wrestling with the dismantled
fastening.

Usually the nightly resort of the little fishing village of
Bernay-sur-Mer, the Bas Rhône, inn, cabaret, tavern or cafe, as it was
variously styled, now held but two others in the room that was
habitually crowded to suffocation.  One was a young man, sturdily
built, with a tanned, clean-cut face, smooth-shaven save for a small
black moustache, whose rumpled black hair straggled in pleasing
disarray over his forehead; the other was older, a man of forty, whose
skin was bronzed almost to blackness from the Mediterranean sun.  Both
were in rough fishermen's dress, sitting at dominoes under the hanging
lamp in the centre of the room.  On the table, pushed to one side, were
the remains of a simple meal of bread and cheese; and from the inside
of the loaf, the younger man, somewhat to the detriment of his own game
and to the advantage of his opponent, had plucked out a piece of the
soft bread, which he had kneaded between his fingers into a plastic
lump, and thereafter, with amazing skill and deftness, had been engaged
in moulding into little faces, and heads, and figures of various sorts,
as he played.

The older man spoke slowly now:

"It is twenty years since we have had the like--you do not remember
that, Jean?  You were too young."

Jean Laparde, an amused smile lurking in his dark eyes as he watched
Jacques Fregeau waddle obediently to his wife's side, shook his head.

"I was on the _Étoile_ that night," said the other, pulling at his
beard.  "The good God dealt hardly with us--we lost two when we
beached; but not so hardly as with the _Antoinette_--none came to shore
from her.  It was a night just such as this."

"Ay, that is so," corroborated Papa Fregeau, removing his apron and
stuffing it into the broken window pane.  "It is, after all, small
blame to any one that they stay indoors to-night and forget my profits."

"Profits!" ejaculated Madame Fregeau tartly.  "You drink them all up!"
She shook her short skirts, damp from her skirmish with the storm, and
turned to Jean's companion at the table.  "Pray the blessed Virgin,"
she said softly, crossing herself reverently, "that there be no boats
out to-night, Pierre Lachance."

"And God for pity on them if there are!" returned the fisherman.  "But
there are none from Bernay-sur-Mer, that is sure."  He played the last
domino before him with a little triumphant flourish.  "Ah, Jean,
count--you are caught, my boy!  It will teach you to pay more attention
to the game, and less to the waste of Madame Fregeau's good bread!"

"She is used to that!" smiled Jean Laparde good-naturedly, as he faced
his dominoes, disclosing the measure of his defeat, and, pushing back
his chair, stood up.

"But," protested the other, "you are not going!  We will play again.
See, it is early, the clock has but just struck eight."

"Not to-night, Pierre," said Jean, laughing now, as he began to button
his jacket around his throat.  "Play with Alcide there."

"Chut!" cried Madame Fregeau, bustling forward, her eyes twinkling.
"The little minx will not expect you a night like this--Marie-Louise is
too sensible a girl to be piqued for that.  You are not going out
to-night, Jean, _ma foi_!"

"And why not?" asked Jean innocently.  "Why not, Mother Fregeau?  What
is a little wind, and a little rain, and a little walk along the beach?"

"But a night like this!" sighed Papa Fregeau dolorously, as he joined
the group, his forefinger laid facetiously against the side of his
stubby little nose.  "_Nom d'un nom_!  What constancy--what sublime
constancy!"

"Ah, you laugh at that, _mon petit bête_!" exclaimed Madame Fregeau
sharply, instantly changing front.  "You are an old fool, Jacques
Fregeau!"

"But I was a young one once, _ma belle_--eh?" insinuated Jacques,
pinching his wife's plump cheek, and winking prodigiously at Jean
Laparde.  "It is of that you are thinking, eh?"

"You are ridiculous!" declared Madame Fregeau, blushing and pushing him
away.

"You see, Jean?" said Jacques Fregeau plaintively, shrugging his
shoulders.  "You see, eh, _mon gaillard_?  You see what you are coming
to!  Oh, _là, là_, once I was young like you, and Lucille, _ma chérie_,
here, was like--eh?--like Marie-Louise.  You see, eh?  You see what you
are coming to!"

There was a roar of laughter from the man at the table in the rear,
that was echoed in a guffaw by Pierre Lachance, as Jean, leaning
suddenly forward, caught Madame Fregeau's comely, motherly face between
his hands and kissed her on both cheeks.

"I'd ask for no better luck, Jacques!" he cried--and ran for the door.

Laughing, and with a wave of his hand back at the little group, he
opened the door, closed it behind him with a powerful wrench against
the wind; and then, outside, stood still for a moment, as though taken
utterly by surprise at the abandon of the night.  He had not been out
before that day.  Like all, or nearly all of Bernay-sur-Mer he had
remained snugly indoors--for what was a fisherman to do in weather like
that!  Mend nets?  Well, yes, he had mended nets.  One must do that.
He shrugged his shoulders, making a wry grimace.  Nets!  But the night
was bad--much worse than he had imagined.  And yet--yes--the storm was
at its height now, but the wind had changed--by morning, thank the
saints, it would be better.

It was black about him, inky black--all save a long, straggling,
twinkling line of lights from the cottage windows that bordered the
beach, and the dull yellow glow from the windows of the Bas Rhône at
his side.  Around him a veritable bedlam seemed loosed--the wind, like
a horde of demons, shrieking, whistling and howling in unholy jubilee;
while heavier, more ominous, in a deeper roar came the booming of the
surf from where it broke upon the beach but little more than a hundred
yards in front of him.

Jean Laparde stood hesitant.  It was quite true; Mother Fregeau had
been right!  Marie-Louise would not expect him to-night, and it was a
good mile from the village to the house on the bluff, and yet--he
smiled a little, and suddenly, head down, struck out into the storm.

A flash of lightning, jagged, threw the night into a strange, tremulous
luminance--the headlands of the little bay; the mighty combers, shaking
their topped crests like manes, hurling themselves in impotent fury at
the shore, then spreading in thin creamy layers to lick up wide,
irregular patches of the beach; the sweep of the Mediterranean, so slow
to anger, but a tumbling rage of waters now as far as the eye could
reach; the whitewashed cottages; boats, dark objects without form or
shape, drawn far up on the sand; the pale, yellowish-green of the sward
stretching away behind the village; the road beneath his feet a pool of
mud--and then blackness again, utter, impenetrable, absolute.

Jean passed the last of the cottages--there were but four on that side
of the Bas Rhône--and kept on, following the curve of the beach toward
the eastern headland.  But now, the lightness of spirit that had been
with him but a few moments before was gone, and a restlessness,
bordering on depression, took its place.  What was it?  The storm?  No;
it could not very well be that, for it had come often to him before,
unbidden, unwelcomed, that same mood--even in the glorious sunlight,
even in the midst of song as he fished the blue, sparkling waters that,
more than anything else, had been his home ever since he could
remember.  It seemed, and it was a very strange and absurd fancy, but
it was always the same, that a voice, wordless, without sound, talked
speciously to him, talked him into a state of discontent that robbed
him of all delight in his work, his environment and his surroundings,
and, arrived at that stage, would suddenly bid him peremptorily to
follow--and that was all.  Follow!  Where?  He did not know.  It made
him angry, but it did not in any way lighten the mood that was forced
upon him in spite of himself.

And now, as it always came, unsought and unexpected, this mood was upon
him again; and, as he plunged through the storm, drawing the collar of
his jacket more closely around his throat against the sheets of rain,
he fought with himself to shake it off.  It was absurd.  And why should
he be unhappy for something that was absurd?  That was still more
absurd!  He was not sick, there was nothing the matter with him.  He
was strong--none was stronger than he, and he had matched himself
against them all in Bernay-sur-Mer.  True, it was a hard life, and
there were not riches to be found in the nets--but there were
friends--he was rich in friends--all Bernay-sur-Mer was his friend.
There were the Fregeaus, with whom he had lived at the Bas Rhône for
over ten years now since his father had died.  Madame Fregeau was a
mother to him, and Jacques was the biggest-hearted man in the whole
south of France.  And, _mon Dieu_!--he began to smile now--there
were--should he name every family in the village?--even to the children
for whom he made the clay _poupées_, the dolls that in their play lives
were, in turn, veritable children to them?  Ah, to be in ugly mind--it
was no less than a sin!  There were candles to burn for that, and the
good Father Anton would have a word to say if he knew!  And best of
all--there was Marie-Louise.  There was none, none _pardieu_, in the
whole wide sweep of France like Marie-Louise, with her eyes like stars,
and her face fresh as the morning breeze across the sparkling waters,
and a figure so beautiful, so lithe, so strong!  What charm to see
those young arms on the oars, the bosom heave, to feel the boat bound
forward under the stroke, and hear her laugh ring out with the pure joy
of life!

"Marie-Louise!" cried Jean Laparde aloud--and the wind seemed to catch
up the words and echo them in a triumphant shout: "Marie-Louise!"

It was gone--that mood.  And now, with the village well behind him, the
lights blotted out and seeming to have left him isolated even from
human proximity, another came--and he stood still--and this time it was
the storm.  And something within him, without will or volition of his,
spontaneous, leapt out in consonance with the wild grandeur of the
night to revel in it, atune with the Titanic magnificence of the
spectacle, as one who gazes upon a splendid canvas and, innate in
appreciation, is lost in the conception to which the master brush has
given life.  And so he stood there for a long time immovable, his
shoulders thrust a little forward, the rain streaming from his face,
his eyes afire, wrapt, lost in the clashing elements before him--and
fancy came.  The play of the lightning was more vivid now, and the
coast line took on changing shapes, as though seeking by new and
swiftly conceived formations to foil and combat and thrust back and
parry the furious attack of the breakers that hurled themselves onward
in their mad, never-ending charge; while behind again, in sudden
apparitions, like spectre battalions massed in reserve, the white
cottages appeared for an instant, and then, as though seeking a more
strategic position, vanished utterly, until a flame-tongue crackling
across the heavens searched them out again, laying their position bare
once more; and the headlands, vanguards where the fight was hottest,
were lost in a smother of spume and spray, like the smoke of battle
swirling over them--and it was battle, and the thunder of the surf was
the thunder of belching cannon, and the shriek of the wind was the
shriek of hurtling shells.  It was battle--and some consciousness
inborn in Jean Laparde awakened and filled him with understanding, and
in the terror; and dismay and awe and strife and fierce elation was the
great allegory of life, and suddenly he knew a lowly reverence for Him
who had depicted this, and a joy, full of a strange indefinable
yearning, in the divine genius of its execution.

"It is the great art of the _bon Dieu_," said Jean simply.

And after a little while he went forward on his way again.

The road led upward now in a gentle slope toward higher land, though
still following the line of the beach.  Near the extremity of the
headland was the cottage that the village always called the "house on
the bluff," and in a moment now he should be able to see the light.
There was always a light there every night, in good weather and in
stormy--and never in fourteen years had it been otherwise, not since
the night that Marie-Louise's father, the brother of old Gaston
Bernier, steering for the headland in a gale had miscalculated his
position and been drowned on the Perigeau Reef.  From that day it had
become a religion with Gaston, a sacred rite, that light; and, in time,
it had become an institution in Bernay-sur-Mer--not a fisherman in the
village now but steered by it, not one but that, failing to sight it,
would have taken it for granted that he was off his course and would
have put about, braving even the wildest weather, until he had picked
it up.

The light!  Jean smiled to himself.  He was very wet, but he had found
a most wonderful joy in the storm--and, besides, what did a little
wetting matter?  In a few minutes now Marie-Louise would cry out in
delight at seeing him, and he would fling off his drenched jacket and
pull up a chair to the stove beside old Gaston, and they would light
their pipes, and Marie-Louise would prepare the spiced wine, and--he
halted as though stunned.

He had reached the big rock where the road made its second turn and ran
directly to the house--and there was no light.  It was the exact spot
from which he should first be able to see it--a hundred times, on a
hundred nights, he had looked for it, and found it there--by the
turning at the big rock.  He dashed the rain from his face with a sweep
of his hand, and strained his eyes into the blackness.  There was
nothing there--only the blackness.  He reached out mechanically and
touched the rock, as though to assure himself that it was there--and
then he laughed a little unnaturally.  There must be some mistake--for
fourteen years that light had burned in the window, and it could be
seen from this point on the road--there must be some mistake.  Perhaps
just another step would bring it into view!

And then, as he moved forward, something cold gripped at Jean's heart.
There was no mistake--the light was out for the first time in fourteen
years!  The light that old Gaston had never failed to burn since the
night his brother died, the light that had become a part of the man
himself--was out!  Was he ill--sick?  Why, then, had Marie-Louise not
lighted it?  She had done it before, often and often before.  But now
neither one nor the other had lighted it, and they, just the two of
them, were the only occupants of the house--Marie-Louise and her old
uncle.  Just the two of them--and the light was out!

Jean was running now, smashing his way along the road through the
clayey mud and water, splashing it to his knees, buffeting against the
wind; and, with every step, the sense of dread that had settled upon
him grew heavier.  It was no ordinary thing this!  Old Gaston would
have lighted the lamp while there remained strength in his body to do
it; it was a sacred trust that he had imposed upon himself which had
grown more inviolable as the years had crept upon him and he had grown
older.  It brought fear to Jean, and the greater stab at the thought of
Marie-Louise.  Things were wrong--and what was wrong with one was wrong
with both.  Was it not Marie-Louise who polished the great lamp chimney
so zealously every morning and filled the big, dinted brass bowl of the
lamp with oil; and was it not Marie-Louise who watched with
affectionate understanding each evening as her uncle lighted it?

A shadowy mass, the house, loomed suddenly out of the darkness before
him.  It seemed to give him added speed, and in another moment he was
at the door--and the door was open, wide open, blown inward with the
wind.

"Marie-Louise!" he shouted, as he rushed inside.  "Gaston!  Gaston!"
And again: "Marie-Louise!"

There was no answer--no sound but the shriek of wind, the groaning of
the house timbers in travail with the storm.  He pushed the door shut
behind him, and something like a sob came from Jean's lips--and then he
shouted once more.

Still there was no answer.

He felt his way to the kitchen, and across the kitchen to the shelf by
the rear wall, found a candle, and lighted it.  He held the flame above
his head, sweeping the light about him, and, discovering nothing, ran
back into the front room--and, with a low cry, stood still.  On the
floor the great lamp lay broken, the chimney shattered into splinters.
He stared at it in a frightened, almost superstitious way.  The great
lamp broken!  Did it mean that--no, no, it could not mean that!  It was
the wind that had blown it there in bursting in the door.  See, there
was no disorder anywhere!  He ran into Gaston's room.  Nothing!
Nothing anywhere to indicate that anything had happened--and yet,
apparently, the house was empty--and that was enough!  Out?  They had
gone out somewhere, even in the storm, on some homely errand, to pay a
visit perhaps?  Impossible!  With the lamp for the first time in
fourteen years unlighted, and broken now upon the floor?  It was
impossible!  While Gaston Bernier lived the light would burn!

He climbed the stairs and stood on the threshold of the little attic
room, the flickering candle playing timorously with the darker shadows
where the roof in its sharp angle spread into an inverted V.  It was
the first time he had ever looked into that room.  It was
Marie-Louise's room.  It was all white, scrupulously white, from the
bare floor to the patched quilt on the little bed.  There was a
freshness, a sweetness about it that seemed to personify Marie-Louise,
to fill the room with her--and it swept him now with a sudden numbing
agony, and his face, wet with the rain that dripped from the hair
straggling over his forehead, showed grey and set as it glistened
curiously in the yellow, sputtering candle light.

And then, half mad with anxiety, the sure, intuitive knowledge of
disaster upon him, he rushed downstairs again; and, hurriedly
exchanging his candle for a lantern, went out into the night.

A search around the house revealed no more than within.  He ran then
down the path to the beach, to where, well up under the protection of
the low bluff and away from the reach of the highest tide, old Gaston
stored his boats and fishing gear.  And there, as Jean flashed his
lantern around him, a low, strained cry, for the second time, came from
his lips.  Three boats old Gaston owned--who should know better than
he, Jean Laparde, who fished with the other season after season!--but
of the three boats only two were there upon the beach.

As a man wounded then and dazed with his hurt, Jean stood there.  They
had gone--out into that--Marie-Louise and old Gaston--and they had not
come back.  It was not true--it was beyond belief!  No; it was not
true--something only had happened to the boat--no man in Bernay-sur-Mer
would have been so mad as to have ventured out!

Far to the south the heavens opened in a burst of flame, and,
travelling far and fast, a zigzag tongue of lightning, like the
venomous thrust of a serpent's fang, leaped across the skies.  It
lighted up the beach, and, further out over the waters, a quarter of a
mile away, played upon the smother of spray that like a shroud flung
itself over the Perigeau Reef--and the cry that came from Jean Laparde
was wild, hoarse-throated now.  What was that he had seen!

It was dark again out there.  He swung his lantern, signalling
frantically--then, holding it high and rigid, waited for the next flash.

It came.

"Marie-Louise," he whispered through white lips.

Far out on the extremity of the reef, a figure stood silhouetted
against the spray for an instant--and blackness fell again.




-- II --

THE KEEPERS OF THE LIGHT

For a moment's space Jean stood there measuring, as it were, the sweep
of waters, as one might measure the strength of some antagonist thrust
suddenly upon him--and then, turning, he ran back to the boats, and
began to drag one down the beach.

No man in all Bernay-sur-Mer would dare to venture out.  He had said
that himself--but there was no thought of that now.  Marie-Louise was
on the Perigeau Reef.  He was strong, strong as a young bull, and he
tugged now at the heavy boat with the added nervous strength of a man
near mad with desperation, heaving it swiftly across the sand.  At high
tide even in calm weather the Perigeau was awash--in storm, far better
to plunge into the water than to be pounded to death upon those
_diable_ rocks, lifted up and pounded upon the rocks, and lifted up and
pounded again, when the water should be high.  At ten o'clock it would
be full tide.  Thanks to the _bon Dieu_ it was not eight o'clock when
the water would be at its height, or else--

"_Sacré nom d'un nom, d'un nom_"--Jean was grinding words from between
his teeth.  They came utterly without volition, utterly meaningless,
utterly spontaneous from the brain afire.

It was the lee of the headland, and it was the mercy of the _Sainte
Vierge_ that it was so; otherwise, _baptême de baptême_! no boat could
live where a fish would drown.  But it was the smoother water of a
mill-race--in with the tide, out with the tide--between the headland
and the Perigeau it was like that.

With a wrench, Jean swung the boat around--he had been dragging it by
the stern--and, at the water's edge now, the dying efforts of a spent
and broken wave wrapped and curled around the bow in creamy foam.
Then, racing up the beach once more to the shelter of the bluff, he
knelt there to plant his lantern in the sand, ballasting it securely
with rocks, flung his jacket down beside it, and ran back to the
water's edge again.

He shoved the boat further out until it was half afloat, shipped the
oars--and waited, steadying the craft with an iron grip on the
gunwales.  A wave lifted her, the water swirled around his knees,
seethed behind him, rushed back hissing sharply in its retreat--and
Jean, bending, shoved with all his strength, as he sprang aboard.

The boat shot out on the receding wave, and, as he flung himself upon
the seat, smashed into the next oncoming breaker, wavered, half turned,
righted under a mighty tug at the oars, engulfed herself in a sheet of
spray--and slid onward down into the bubbling hollow.

None in Bernay-sur-Mer was a better boatman than Jean Laparde, and
Bernay-sur-Mer in that respect held its head above all Languedoc; for
at the water fêtes now for three years had not Jean Laparde secured to
it the coveted _prix_!  But to-night it was a different race that lay
before him.

For a little way, while the lee of the headland held, a child almost,
once the boat was free of the broken surf on the beach, might have held
the craft to her course--but only for that little way.  For fifty yards
perhaps the boat leapt forward, straight as an arrow, heading well
above the Perigeau Reef--and then suddenly the lighted lantern on the
beach seemed to travel seaward at an incredible speed, as the onrush of
tide, wind and sea through the narrows caught the boat, twisted it like
a cork, and, high-borne on a wave-crest, hurled it along past the
shoreline toward the lower end of the bay--and the twinkling lantern
was blotted out from sight.  Tight-lipped, his muscles cracking with
the strain, Jean forced the boat around again, and the tough oars bent
under his strokes.

There were two ways to the Perigeau Reef--he had thought of both of
them.  One, to go down in the shelter of the headland to the lower end
of the bay, circuit the shore-line there until he was free of the
mill-race through the narrows, then pull straight out for the
Perigeau--only, the _bon Dieu_ knew well, no man was strong enough for
that; it was too far, for the bay on this side, deeper than on the
other side of the headland by Bernay-sur-Mer, extended inward for
nearly two miles, and to pull back that distance against the full force
of the storm--only a madman would try it, and no boat would live!  The
other way was the only chance--the quarter mile across the narrows.

A quarter mile!  He pulled on and on, minute after minute that were as
endless periods of time; and whether he was making progress or losing
it he did not know, only that with each minute his strength was being
taxed to the utmost, until it seemed to be ebbing from him, until his
arms in their sockets caused him brutal pain.  And it was all like a
black veil that wrapped itself about him now, blacker than it had ever
been before that night--the loss of that tiny guiding light he had left
upon the beach seemed to make it so, and seemed to try to rob him of
his courage because it was gone.  The never-ending roar of buffeting
sea and surf was in his ears until his head rang with the sound--the
waves pounded his boat and tossed it like a chip upon their crests, and
slopped aboard and sloshed at his feet--and they thundered upon the
shore, and upon the headland, and they were mocking at him.  The
lightning came again--it lighted up the house upon the bluff and with
bitter dismay he saw that, too, was sweeping seaward--it flickered a
ghostly radiance upon dancing shore shapes--it played upon a tumbling
wall of water, onrushing, towering above his head from where the boat
quivered in the trough far down below.  And at sight of this, like a
madman, Jean Laparde pulled then--up--up--up--the crest was curling,
snarling its vengeance before it broke--and then it seethed away in a
great trail of murmuring foam that lapped at the boat's sides and crept
in over the gunwales.  And there were many more like that, so many that
they were countless--and they never stopped--and they were stronger
than he--and there was always another--and each was greater than the
one before--and he sobbed at last in utter weakness over the oars.

Marie-Louise, Gaston, the Perigeau, all were living before him in a
daze now--the brain became subordinate to the bodily exhaustion.  There
was only a jumbled medley of hell and death and eternal struggle around
him, and a subconsciousness that for him too the end had come--the good
Father Anton would say a requiem mass for him--and Bernay-sur-Mer would
tell its children that Jean would never make any more of the clay
_poupées_ for them--and the children would cry--and it was all very
droll.

He pulled on, mechanically, doggedly.  His face was wrinkled where the
muscles twisted in pain, drops that were not rain nor spray stood out
in great beads upon his forehead, his back seemed breaking, his arms
useless things that writhed with the strain upon them.

Wild thoughts came to him.  Why should he struggle there against the
pitiless strength that was greater than his, until he could no longer
even meet the waves with the bow of his boat, until they would turn him
over and over and afterwards roll him upon the shore, where Papa
Fregeau, perhaps, would find him!  See, it would be a very easy matter
to stop while he had yet a little strength left to guide the boat--and
run with the waves--and it would rest him--and by the time he got to
the shore he would be quite strong enough again to fight his way
through the breakers.  His lips moved, teeth working over them, biting
into them, tinging them with blood.  It came out of this hell and these
storm devils around him, that thought!  Marie-Louise was waiting, was
she not, upon the Perigeau--and when the tide was high and the sea was
calm one could row over the Perigeau, and sometimes see a _dragonet_,
with the beautiful blue and yellow marking on its white scaleless body,
looking for food in the rock crevices out of its curious eyes that were
in the top of its head!

A flicker of light!  Yes--yes--the lantern!  He was abreast of it
again.  The good God had not deserted him!  He was still strong--there
was iron in his arms again--the torture of pulling was gone.  He could
feel the boat lift now to the stroke.

He pulled, taking his breath in catchy sobs.  The boat swept downward
into a great trough, rose again, trembling, balancing on the next
crest--and the light had disappeared.  A cry gurgled from Jean's
throat, impotent, full of anguish.  It was an hallucination, a torture
of the devil!  No!  There it was once more--he caught it on the next
rise, and each succeeding one now.  And he, not it now, was making
headway seaward.  He was across the tide-race, it was the Madonna who
had prayed for him! and in another little while, soon now, just as soon
as the lantern showed a little further astern, he would get the lee of
the Perigeau itself--it would be broken water, but it would be like a
child's effort then.  And that!--what was that!

"Jean!"--it came ringing down with the wind, a brave, strong voice.
"_Jean!_"

It was Marie-Louise!  His strength was the strength of a god again.  He
shot a hurried glance over his shoulder--it was done--but one had need
for care that the boat should not thrash itself to pieces on the rocks.
Yes; he saw her now--like a dark, wind-swept wraith.

"To the right, Jean--there is landing to the right!" she called.

"Ay!" he shouted back; and, standing, swung in the boat.

The bow touched the edge of the rocks, grated, pounded, receded, and
came on again--there was no beach here--only the vicious swirl and chop
of the back-eddy.  But as the keel touched again, Jean sprang over into
the water; and as he sprang, a figure from the rocks rushed in waist
deep to grasp the boat's gunwale on the other side--and across the bow,
very close to him, Marie-Louise's white face was framed in the night.
It was very dark, he could not see her features distinctly, but he had
never seen Marie-Louise look like that before--it was not that her face
was aged, nothing, _bon Dieu_! could take the springtime from that
face, but it was very tired, and frightened, and glad, and full of
grief.

"Jean, ah, Jean, you--" the wind carried away her words.  Then she
shouted louder, a curious break, like a half sob, in her voice.  "Uncle
Gaston is hurt--very, very badly hurt.  He is up there a little way on
the reef.  You must carry him.  And if you hurry, Jean, I can hold the
boat."

"Gaston--hurt!" he cried in dismay.  "You are sure then you can hold
the boat, and--"

"Yes, yes, if you hurry, Jean--he is there, a few yards back, a little
to the left."

"Guard yourself then that it does not pull you off your feet!" he
cautioned anxiously, and began to scramble from the water and up the
slippery, weeded rocks.

And then, a few yards back on the ledge, as she had said, just out of
the reach of the spray that lashed the windward side of the Perigeau,
he came upon an outstretched form--and, kneeling, called the other's
name:

"Gaston!  It is I--Jean Laparde!"  He bent closer--one could not hear
for the _diable_ wind!  "Gaston!"  There was only a low moaning--the
man was unconscious.  "_'Cré nom d'une forte peine!_" muttered Jean,
with a sinking heart, and picked up the other tenderly in his arms.

But it was not easy, that little way back to the boat.  Burdened now,
the wind behind his back sent him staggering forward before he could
find footing, and ten times in the dozen steps he lurched, slipped and
all but fell before, close to the boat again, he laid Gaston down upon
the rocks.

"We must bale out the boat, Marie-Louise," he shouted, wading quickly
into the water; "or with what we take in on the way back she will not
ride.  See, I will hold it while you bale--it will be easier for you."

She answered something as she set instantly to work, but her words were
lost in the storm.  And Jean, through the darkness, as he gripped at
the boat, watched her, his mind a sea of turmoil like the turmoil of
the sea about him.  Gaston was hurt--yes, very badly hurt, it would
seem--how had it happened?--how had they come, Marie-Louise and Gaston,
to be upon the Perigeau?--and he, who had given up hope, who had
thought to perish out there in that crossing, he, too, was on the
Perigeau--the way to get back was to run straight in with the bay--it
would not be so hard if they could out-race the waves--if the waves
came in over the stern it would be to swamp and--God had been very good
to let them live and--

Marie-Louise's hand closed over his on the gunwale.

"It is done, Jean--what I could do," she said.  "I will hold the boat
again while you lift Uncle Gaston in."

And suddenly Jean's heart was very full.

"Marie-Louise, Marie-Louise!" he said hoarsely--and while her hands
grasped the rocking boat, his crept around the wet shoulders for an
instant, and to her face, and turned the face upward to his, and, in
that wild revelry of storm, kissed her; and with a choked sob he went
from her then and picked up the unconscious form upon the rocks.

And so they started back.

There was no sweep of tide to battle with now--the waves bore them high
and shot them onward, shoreward; and the storm was wings to them.  But
there was danger yet; on the top of the crests it was like a pivot,
each one threatening to whirl them broadside and capsize them on the
breathless rush down the steep slope that yawned below--that, and the
fear that the downward rush, breathless as it was, would not be fast
enough to escape the crest itself, which, following them always,
hanging over them like hesitant doom far up above, trembling, twisting,
writhing, might break in a seething torrent and, sweeping over them,
engulf them.  It was not so hard now, the way back, there was not the
pitiless current that numbed the soul because the body was so frail;
but all the craft Jean knew, all the strength that was his was in play
again.

The boat swept onward.  Marie-Louise was crouched in the stern
supporting Gaston's head upon her lap.  Jean could not see her face.
When he dared take his eyes for an instant from the racing waves behind
her, he looked at her, but he could not see her face--it was bent
always over Gaston's head.  And a fear grew heavy in Jean's heart--the
old fisherman had not moved since he, Jean, had found the other on the
reef.  Once he shouted at Marie-Louise, shouted out the fear that was
upon him--but she only shook her head.

The rain had stopped--he noticed the fact with a strange shock of
surprise--surprise that he had not noticed it before, as though it were
something extraneous to his surroundings.  And then he remembered that
as he had stood outside the Bas Rhône he had seen that the wind had
changed, and had told himself that by morning it would be better
weather.  He glanced above him.  The storm wrack was still there; but
it was broken now, and the low, flying clouds seemed thinner--yes, by
morning it would be bright sunshine, and of the storm only the heavy
sea would be left.

He gave his eyes to the tumbling waters again--and, suddenly, with a
great cry, began to pull until it seemed his arms must break.  Roaring
behind them, a giant wave was on the point of breaking--closer it
came--closer--he yelled to Marie-Louise:

"Hold fast, Marie-Louise!  Hold fast!"

And then it was upon them.

For a moment it was a vortex--a white, swirling flood of water churned
to lather.  It hid the stern of the boat, hid Marie-Louise and Gaston
at her feet, as it poured upon them--and the boat, lifted high up, hung
dizzily for an instant, poised as on the edge of an abyss, then the
wave rolled under them, and the boat swept on in its wake, the shipped
water rushing now this way now that in the bottom.

It was an escape!  The blessed saints still had them in their keeping!
Jean sucked in his breath.  A foot nearer when the wave had broken,
and, instead of the few bucketsful they had taken, the boat would have
filled!  And now Marie-Louise, already baling at the water, cried out
to him.

"See!  It was a mercy!"--her voice rang with a glad uplift.  "It was
sent by the _bon Dieu_, that wave!  It has brought life to Uncle
Gaston!"

It was true.  The deluge of water had, temporarily at least, restored
the old fisherman to consciousness, for he raised himself up now, and
Jean heard him speak.

After that, time marked no definite passing for Jean.  Occasionally he
heard Marie-Louise's voice as she spoke to her uncle; and occasionally
he heard the old fisherman reply--but that was all.  In nearer the
shore, where the current rushing through the narrows had lost its
potency, he edged the boat across the heavy sea, gained the comparative
calm under the lee of the headland, and began to work back to the upper
end--it was easier that way, difficult and slow as the progress was,
than to land and carry old Gaston along the beach.  An hour?  It might
have been that--or two--or half an hour--when he and Marie-Louise, in
the water beside him again, and close by where the lantern under the
bluff still burned as he had left it, were dragging the boat free from
the breakers and up upon the sand.

And then, while Marie-Louise ran for the lantern, Jean leaned over into
the boat.

"Gaston!" he called.  "See, we are back!  Can you hear me?"

"Yes," Gaston answered feebly.

"Then put your arms around my neck, _mon brave_, and I will lift you
up."

The arms rose slowly, clasped; and Jean, straightening up, was holding
the other as a woman holds a child.  Gaston's head fell on his
shoulder, and the old fisherman whispered weakly in his ear.

"My side, Jean--hold me--lower--down."

"But, yes," Jean answered cheerily.  "There--is that better.  We shall
get easily to the house like this, and Marie-Louise"--she was back
again now--"will lead the way with the lantern."

Gaston's only answer was a slight pressure of his arm around Jean's
neck--but now, as the lantern's rays for an instant fell upon the
other's features, Jean's own face set like stone.  The old fisherman's
eyes were closed, and the skin, where it showed through the grizzled
beard, wet and tangled now, was a deathly white--and Jean, motioning to
Marie-Louise, started hurriedly forward.

Only once on the way to the house, as Jean followed Marie-Louise up the
path from the beach, did Gaston speak again; and then it was as though
he were talking to himself, his tones low and broken, almost like the
sobbing of a child.  Jean caught the words.

"René--René, my brother--the light is out, René--the light is out."

And with the words, something dimmed suddenly before Jean's eyes, and
the path, for a moment, and Marie-Louise were as a mist in front of
him.  The light!  For fourteen years the man he held in his arms had
burned that light--and the light was out now forever.

He hurried on, and, reaching the house, laid Gaston on the bed in the
little room off the kitchen that belonged to the other; then turned
swiftly to Marie-Louise, for the old fisherman had lost consciousness
again.

"Cognac, Marie-Louise!" he said quickly.

She ran for the brandy--and while Jean forced a few drops through
Gaston's lips, holding up the lantern to watch the other, she went from
the room again and brought back a lamp.

"Jean," she cried pitifully, as she set it upon the table, "he is not--"

Jean shook his head.

"No; he will be better in a minute now.  It is but a little fainting
spell."

She did not answer--barefooted, the short skirt just reaching to the
ankles, her black hair, loosened, tumbling about her shoulders in a
sodden mass, she came a little closer to the bed, her hands clasped,
the dark eyes wide with troubled tenderness, the red lips parted, the
white cheeks still glistening with spray; and, unconscious of her pose,
the wet clothes, untrammelled in their simplicity, clinging closely to
her limbs and her young rounded bosom, revealed in chaste freedom the
perfect contour and beauty of her form.

Something stirred Jean's spirit within him, and for a moment he was
oblivious to his surroundings; for, as he looked, she seemed to stand
before him the living counterpart of a wondrous piece of sculpture, in
bronze it was, marvellously conceived, that he had dreamed of again and
again in vague, restless dreams--the statue, for it was always the same
statue in his dreams, that was set in the midst of a great city, in a
great square, and--

"Marie-Louise!" he said aloud unconsciously.

But she shook her head, pointing to the bed.

Gaston had stirred, and, opening his eyes now, fixing them on the glass
still held in Jean's hand, he motioned for more brandy.  And Jean, his
moment of abstraction gone as quickly as it had come, bent hastily
forward and gave it to him.

The raw spirit brought a flush to the old fisherman's cheeks.

"Father Anton," he said.  "Go for Father Anton."

"_Bien sûr!_" responded Jean soothingly.  "I will go at once.  It was
what I thought of when I was carrying you up the beach.  I said: 'Since
there is no doctor in Bernay-sur-Mer, I will get Father Anton, who is
as good a doctor as he is a priest, and he will have Gaston here on his
feet again by morning.'"  He moved away from the bed--but Gaston put
out his hand and stopped him.

"Not you, Jean; I want to talk to you--Marie-Louise will go."

"Marie-Louise!" exclaimed Jean, shaking his head.  "But no!  You have
forgotten the storm, Gaston--and, see, she is all wet and tired, and
she has been, I do not know how many hours, exposed out there on that
curséd Perigeau."

A smile, half stubborn, half of pride, struggled through a twist of
pain on the old fisherman's lips.

"And what of that!  She has been brought up to it.  A dozen times and
more she has been longer in a storm than this.  She is not of the
milk-and-water breed is Marie-Louise, she is a Bernier, and, the _bon
Dieu_ be praised, the Berniers do not stop for that!  Is it not so,
Marie-Louise?"

"Yes, uncle," she answered softly.  "I will go; and I will not be long."

"Go then, Marie-Louise," he said.  "I wish it."

She bent and kissed him, and picked up the lantern, and shook her head
in a pretty gesture at Jean, as though half to tease him for the
perturbed look upon his face, and half in grave wistfulness to charge
him with the sick man's care--and then she went from the room, and
presently the front door closed behind her.

The lamp flickered with the inrush of wind from the opening of the
door--flickered over a spotless bare floor, an incongruous high-poster
bed that had been a wedding gift to Marie-Louise's father and mother
from the man who lay upon it now, flickered over the raftered ceiling,
the scant furnishings which were a single chair and a table, flickered
over a crucifix upon the wall--and then burned on once more in a steady
flame.  It was like the shrug of Jean's shoulders, the flicker of that
lamp; for, with the shrug, he resumed again his former position over
Gaston--it was true after all, Marie-Louise would come to no harm, they
were used to that, they fisherfolk of Bernay-sur-Mer.

"_Tiens_, Gaston!" he said.  "See, we will get off your wet clothes,
and you will tell me how it happened this _misère_, and about the hurt.
But first this--_mon Dieu!_--but I did not guess it was like that--a
clean bandage, eh?--that is first--I will find something"--he had
unbuttoned the other's jacket, disclosing a rent shirt, and, on the
left side, a wad of cloth, blood-soaked now, where Marie-Louise
evidently had made a pad for the wound with her underskirt, and had
tied it in place with long strips torn from the garment.  He began to
loosen one of the strips; but Gaston, who until then had lain passive
with eyes closed, caught his hand.

"Let it alone, Jean--you will only make it bleed the more."

"Ay," agreed Jean thoughtfully; "perhaps that is so.  It would be
better maybe to leave it for Father Anton."

A wan smile came to Gaston's lips.

"Father Anton will not touch it either, Jean."

And then Jean, with a sudden start, stared into the other's eyes.

"It is destiny!" said Gaston slowly.  "Did you, too, like Marie-Louise,
think it was for that I sent for the good father?  It is the priest and
Mother Church I need, there is no doctor that could help."

"But, no!" Jean protested anxiously.  "You must not talk like that,
Gaston!  It is not so!  Wait!  You will see!  Father Anton will tell
you that in a few days you will be strong again.  It is the weakness
now."

Gaston shook his head.

"You are a brave man, Jean, but I, too, am brave--and I am not
afraid--not afraid for myself--it is for Marie-Louise--it is for that I
kept you here and sent her for Father Anton.  I know--something is hurt
inside--I am bleeding there."

And now Jean made no answer--no words would come.  The utter weakness
in the voice, the feeble movements of the hands, the greyer pallor in
the other's face seemed to dawn upon him with its full significance for
the first time--and for a moment it seemed to stun and bewilder him.

"It is destiny!" said Gaston again.  "Listen!  It is fourteen years
since René, my brother, Marie-Louise's father, was drowned on the
Perigeau.  I swore that night that through neither God nor devil should
another lose his life as René had--and for fourteen years I burned the
light, and laughed at the Perigeau as it gnawed its teeth in the
storms."  He stopped, and touched his lips with the tip of his tongue.
"It is the hand of God," he whispered hoarsely, "The light is out--and
it is the Perigeau again."

Jean pulled the chair closer to the bed, and took one of Gaston's hands.

"It means nothing that, Gaston," he said, trying to control his voice.
"It is bad to think such thoughts--and of what good are they?  You must
not think of that.  Tell me what happened, how you and Marie-Louise
came to be out there to-night."

Gaston lay quiet for a little while--so long that Jean thought the
other had not heard the question.  Then the old fisherman spoke again.

"Marie-Louise will tell you.  I have other things to say, and I have
not strength enough for all.  It is hard to talk.  Give me the cognac
again, Jean."

He drank almost greedily this time, and, as Jean held up his head that
he might do so the more readily, the grim old lips and unflinching eyes
smiled back their thanks.

"Listen to me well, Jean," he went on earnestly.  "Marie-Louise is very
dear to me.  I love the little girl.  All her life she has lived with
me--for two years after she was born in this house here, her mother and
René and I--and two years more with René and I--and then, after that,
it was just Marie-Louise and I alone.  She had no one else--and I had
no one else.  I have taught her as the _bon Dieu_ has shown me the way
to teach her to be a true daughter of France--to love God and be never
afraid.  Jean"--he reached out his other hand suddenly and clasped it
over Jean's--"do you love Marie-Louise?"

"Yes," said Jean simply.

"She will be alone now," said Gaston, and his eyes filled.  "She is a
good girl, Jean.  She is pure and innocent, and her heart is so full of
love, there was never such love as hers, and she is so gay and bright
like the flowers and like the birds--and happy--and sorrow has not come
to her."  He stopped once more, and the grey eyes searched Jean's face
as though they would read to the other's soul.  "Jean," he asked again,
"do you love Marie-Louise?"

Jean's lips were quivering now.

"Yes," he answered.  "You know I love her."

The old fisherman lay back, silent, still for a moment, but he kept
pressing Jean's hand.  When he spoke again, it seemed that it was with
more of an effort.

"This house, the land, the boats, the nets, they are hers--it is her
_dot_.  But it is not of that, I fear--it is not of that--" his voice
died away.  Again he was silent; and then, suddenly, raising himself on
his elbow: "Jean," he asked for the third time, almost fiercely now,
"do you love Marie-Louise?"

"But yes, Gaston," said Jean gently.  "I have loved her all my life."

"Yes; it is so," Gaston muttered slowly.  "I give her to you then,
Jean--she is a gift to you from the sea--from the sea to-night.  She
loves you, Jean--she has told me so.  You will be good to her, Jean?"

The tears were in Jean's eyes.

"Gaston, can you ask it?" he cried out brokenly.

"Ay!" said Gaston, and his voice rang out in a strange, stern note, and
his form, as he lifted himself up once more, seemed to possess again
its old rugged strength.  "Ay--I do more than ask it.  Swear it, Jean!
To a dying man and in God's presence, see, there is a crucifix there,
swear that you will guard her and that you will let no harm come to
her."

"I swear it, Gaston," said Jean, in a choking voice.

"It is well, then," Gaston murmured--and lay back upon the bed.

For a little while, Jean, dim-eyed, watched the other, a hundred
reminiscences of their work together stabbing at his heart, and then he
rose and began to remove what he could of the old fisherman's clothing.

"I will not touch the wound, Gaston," he said; "but the boots, _mon
brave_, and--"

Gaston did not answer.  He appeared to have sunk into a semi-stupor,
from which even the removal of his clothes did not arouse him.  Jean
pulled a blanket up around the other's form, and sat down again in the
chair.

Once, as Gaston muttered, Jean leaned forward toward the other.

"It is destiny--the Perigeau--the light is out--René, it is--"  The
words trailed off into incoherency.

The minutes passed.  Occasionally, with a spoon now, Jean poured a few
drops of brandy between Gaston's lips; otherwise, he sat there, his
head in his hands, tight-lipped, staring at the floor.  Outside, that
vicious howl of wind seemed to have died away--perhaps it was hushed
because old Gaston was like this--Marie-Louise had been gone a long
time--presently she and Father Anton would be back, and--

He looked up to find Gaston's eyes open and fixed upon him feverishly,
the lips struggling to say something.

"What is it, Gaston?" he asked.

"The light, Jean," Gaston whispered.  "It is--for--the last time.  Go
and--light--the--great lamp."

"Yes, Gaston," Jean answered, and went from the room--but at the door
he covered his face with his hands, and his shoulders shook like a
child whose heart is broken, as his feet in that outer room crunched on
the shattered glass of the lamp that would never burn again.  He dashed
the tears from his eyes, and for a moment stared unseeingly before him,
then turned and went back to Gaston's side again in the inner room.

Gaston's eyes searched his face eagerly.

"It burns?" he cried out.

"It burns," said Jean steadily.

And Gaston smiled, and the stupor fell upon him again.

And then after a long time Jean heard footsteps without, then the
opening of the front door--and then it seemed to Jean that a
benediction had fallen upon the room.

Framed in the doorway, a little worn black bag in his hand, his
_soutane_ splashed high with mud though it was caught up now around his
waist with a cord, stood Father Anton, the beloved of all
Bernay-sur-Mer.  And, as he stood there and the kindly blue eyes
searched the figure on the bed, the fine old face, under its crown of
silver hair, grew very grave--and without moving from his position he
beckoned to Jean.

"Jean, my son," he said softly, "make our little Marie-Louise here put
on dry clothing.  I will be a little while with Gaston alone."

Marie-Louise was standing behind the priest.  Father Anton stepped
aside for Jean to pass--and then the door dosed quietly.

"Jean!"--she caught his arm.  "Jean tell me!"

Jean did not answer--there were no words with which to answer her.

"Oh, Jean!" she said--and a little sob broke her voice.

"Go and put on dry things, Marie-Louise," he said.

"No--not now," she answered.  "Give me your hand."

They stood there in the darkness.  He felt her hand tremble.  Neither
spoke.  Father Anton's voice, in a low, constant murmur, came to them
now.

Her hand tightened.

"I know," she said.  "It is the Sacrament."

"He said he had taught you to be never afraid," said Jean.

Her hand tightened again.

It was a long while.  And then the door behind them opened, and Father
Anton came between them, and drew Marie-Louise's head to his bosom and
stroked her hair, and placed his other arm around Jean's shoulders--and
for a moment he stood like that--and then he drew them to the window.

"See, my children," he said gently, "there are the stars, and there is
peace after the storm.  It is so with sorrow, for out of the blackness
of grief God brings us comfort in His own good pleasure.  He has called
Gaston home."




-- II --

THE BEACON

It was half clay, half mud; but out of it one could fashion the little
_poupées_, the dolls for the children.  They would not last very long,
it was true; but then one fashioned them quickly, and there was delight
in making them.

Jean dug a piece of the clay with his sheaf knife, leaned over from the
bank of the little creek, and moistened it in the water.  He dug
another, moistened that, moulded the two together--and Marie-Louise
smiled at him a little tremulously, as their eyes met.

The tears were very near to those brave dark eyes since three days ago.
Jean mechanically added a third piece of clay to the other two.  Much
had happened in those three days--all Bernay-sur-Mer seemed changed
since that afternoon when Gaston, so Marie-Louise had told him, seeing
a boat adrift and fearing there might be some one in it, had tried
during a lull in the storm to reach it with her assistance, and an oar
had broken, and the tide on the ebb had driven them close to the
Perigeau where they had swamped, and somehow Gaston had been flung upon
the outer edges of the reef, and the boat, sodden, weighted, following,
had crushed him against the rocks.

Jean looked at Marie-Louise again.  She was all in black now--she and
good Mother Fregeau had made the dress between them for the church that
morning, when Father Anton had said the mass for Gaston.  But
Marie-Louise was not looking at him--her elbows were on the ground, her
chin was cupped in her hands, and the long black lashes veiled her
eyes.  She had not told him any more of the story--Jean could picture
that for himself.  How many times must she have risked her life to have
pulled Gaston to the rocks higher up upon the reef!  A daughter of
France, Gaston had called her.  _Bon Dieu_, but she was that, with her
courage and her strength!  One would not think the strength was there,
but then the black dress did not cling like the wet clothes that other
night to show the litheness of the rounded limbs.

His fingers began to work into the clay, unnaturally diffident and
hesitant at first, not with the deft certainty of their custom, but as
though groping tentatively for something that was curiously intangible,
that eluded them.  Marie-Louise, as she had been that night, was living
before him again--the lines of her form so full of grace and so
beautiful, so full of the virility of her young womanhood, the shapely
head, the hair streaming in abandon about her shoulders--and it was
like and yet not like that great bronze statue so often in his dreams,
imaginary and yet so real, that was set in the midst of that great city
in a great square.  And then suddenly, strangely, of their own
volition, it seemed, his fingers, where they had been hesitant before,
began now to work with a sure swiftness.

His eyes were drinking in the contour of Marie-Louise's face in a rapt,
eager, subconscious way.  There was something deeper there than the
mere prettiness of feature, something that was impressing itself in an
absorbing, insistent way upon him.  Her face made him think of the face
of that statue--there was a hint of masculinity that brought with it no
coarseness, nor robbed it of its sweetness or its charm, but like that
massive face of bronze that towered high, that people with uplifted
heads stood and gazed upon, that none passed by without a pause,
stamped it with calm fearlessness; and courage and resolve outshone all
else and alone was dominant there.

Marie-Louise sat up suddenly from the ground and turned toward him, her
brows gathered in a pretty, puzzled way.

"Why do you look at me like that, Jean?" she demanded abruptly.  "And
what are you doing there?  It is not the doll you promised to make for
little Ninon Lachance--it is much too big."  She leaned forward.  "What
are you making?"

"_Ma foi_!" Jean muttered, with a little start--and stared at the lump
of clay.  "I--I do not know."

"Well, then," said Marie-Louise gravely, "don't do any more.  I want to
talk to you, Jean."

"How, not do any more!" protested Jean whimsically.  "Was it not you
who said, 'We will go to the creek this afternoon and make _poupées_'?
And look"--he jerked his hand toward a large basket on the ground
beside him--"to do that I shall perhaps not keep my promise to meet the
_Lucille_ when she comes in and bring a panier of fish to Jacques
Fregeau at the Bas Rhône.  And now you say, 'Don't do any more'!"

"Yes; I know," admitted Marie-Louise.  "But I want to talk to you.
Listen, Jean.  To-morrow Mother Fregeau must go back to the Bas Rhône.
She has been too long away in her kindness now.  You know how she came
to me the next morning after Uncle Gaston died, and put her arms around
me and has stayed ever since."

Jean shifted the lump of clay a little away from Marie-Louise, but his
fingers still worked on.

"She has a heart of gold," asserted Jean.  "Who should know any better
than I, who have lived with her all these years?"

Marie-Louise's eyes travelled slowly in a half tender, half pensive way
over Jean.  His coat was off; the loose shirt was open at the neck
displaying the muscular shoulders, and the sleeves were rolled up over
the brown, tanned arms; the powerful hands, powerful for all their
long, slim, tapering fingers, worked on and on; the black hair
clustered truantly, as it always did, over the broad, high forehead.
She had known Jean all her life, as many years as she could remember,
and her love for him was very deep.  It had come to seem her life, that
love; and each night in her prayers she had asked the _bon Dieu_ to
bless and take care of Jean, and to make her a good wife to him when
that time should come.  It was so great, that love, that sometimes it
frightened her--somehow it was frightening her now, for there was a
side to Jean that, well as she knew him, she felt intuitively she had
never been able to understand.

She spoke abruptly again, a little absently.

"I do not know yet what I am to do.  There is the house, and Father
Anton says I must not live there alone."

"But, no!" agreed Jean.  "Of course not!  That is what I say, too.  It
is all the more reason why we should not wait any longer, you and I,
Marie-Louise."

A tinge of colour crept shyly into Marie-Louise's face, as she shook
her head.

"No; we must wait, Jean.  It is too soon after--after poor Uncle
Gaston."

"But it was Gaston's wish, that," persisted Jean gently.  "Have I not
told you what he said, _petite_?"

Again Marie-Louise shook her head.

"But one is sad for all that," she answered.  "And to go to the church,
Jean, when one is sad, when one should go so happy!  Oh, I want to be
happy then, Jean.  I do not want to think of anything that day but only
you, Jean--and sing, and there must be sunshine and fête.  But now, for
a little while, it is Uncle Gaston.  You do not think that wrong?"

"No," said Jean slowly, "it is not wrong, and I understand; but then,
too, Gaston would understand, for it was his wish."

Marie-Louise bent forward with a strange little impulsive movement.

"That is twice you have said that, Jean," she said.  "I--I almost wish
Uncle Gaston had not said what he did to you that night.  Jean, it--it
is not what he said, nor what you said to him.  That must not make any
difference.  Never, never, Jean!  One does not marry for that--it is
only if there is love."

"_Mais, 'cré nom_!" exclaimed Jean, suddenly setting aside his clay and
catching Marie-Louise's face between his hands.  "Why do you talk like
that?  What queer fancies are in that little head?  Now, tell me"--he
kissed her lips, while the blood rushed crimson to her cheeks--"tell
me, is that not answer enough?  And have we not loved each other long
before that night, and does not all Bernay-sur-Mer know that it will
dance at the _noces_?"

"Yes," whispered Marie-Louise, a little breathlessly.

"Ah, then," said Jean tenderly, "you must not talk like that.  What,
Marie-Louise, if I should say to myself, 'now perhaps Marie-Louise has
not loved me all these years, and--'"

She drew hurriedly away.

"Don't, Jean!" she said quickly.  "It hurts, that!  I love you so much
that sometimes I am afraid.  And to-day I am afraid.  I do not know
why.  And sometimes it is so different.  That night on the reef when I
thought that soon the rocks would be covered and that there was no help
for Uncle Gaston and myself, and that no one could come to us even if
we were seen, I saw your lantern and the _bon Dieu_ told me it was you
and I had no more fear.  I was so sure then--so sure then.  Oh, Jean,
you must be very good to me to-day.  It--it was so hard"--the dark eyes
were swimming now with tears--"to say good-bye to Uncle Gaston.
Perhaps it is that that is making me feel so strangely.  But sometimes
it seems as though it could never be, the great happiness for you and
me, it is so great to think about that--that it frightens me.  And I
have wanted to talk to you about it, Jean, often and often.  Does it
make you very glad and happy, too, to think of just you and me together
here, and our home, and the fishing, and--and years and years of it?"

"But, yes; of course!" smiled Jean; and, picking up the clay again,
began to scrape at it with his knife.

"But are you sure, Jean?"--there was a little tremor in her voice.  "I
do not mean so much that you are sure you love me, but that you are
sure you would always be happy to stay here in Bernay-sur-Mer.  You are
not like the other men."

"How not like them?" Jean demanded, surveying in an absorbed sort of
way the little clay figure that was taking on rough outline now.  "How
not like them?"

"Well--that!"--Marie-Louise pointed at the clay in his hands.  "That,
for one thing--that you are always playing with, that it seems you
cannot put aside for an instant, even though I asked you to a moment
ago.  You are always making the _poupées_, and if not the _poupées_
with mud and dirt, then you must waste the inside of Mother Fregeau's
loaves that she bakes herself, or steal the dough before it reaches the
oven to keep your fingers busy making little faces and droll things out
of it."

Jean looked up to stare at Marie-Louise a little perplexedly.

"_Mais, zut_!" he exclaimed.  "And what of that!  And if I amuse myself
that way, what of that?  It is nothing!"

"Nevertheless," Marie-Louise insisted, nodding her head earnestly, "it
is true what I have said--that you are not like the other men in
Bernay-sur-Mer.  Do you think that I have not watched you, Jean?  And
have you not said little things to show that you grow tired of the
fishing?"

"But that is true of everybody," Jean protested.  "Does not Father
Anton say that all the world is poor because there is none in it who is
contented?  And if I grumble sometimes, do not all the others do the
same?  Pierre Lachance will swear to you twice every hour that the
fishing is a dog's life."

She shook her head.

"It is different," she said.  "You are not Pierre Lachance, Jean, and I
want you to be happy all your life--that is what I ask the _bon Dieu_
for always in my prayers.  And I do not know why these thoughts come,
and I do not understand them, only I know that they are there."

"Then--_voilà_!  We will drive them away, and they must never come
back!" Jean burst out, half gaily, half gravely.  "See, now,
Marie-Louise"--he caught her hand in both of his, putting aside the
lump of clay again--"it is true that sometimes I am like that, and I do
not understand either; but one must take things as they are, is that
not so?"

She nodded--a little doubtfully.

"Well, then," cried Jean, "why should I not be happy here?  Have I not
you, and is that not most of all?  And as for the rest, do I not do
well with the fishing?  Is there any who does better?  Do they not
speak of the luck of Jean Laparde?  _'Cré nom_!  Different from the
others!  Who is a fisherman if it is not I, who have been a fisherman
all my life?  And of what good is it to wish for anything else?  What
else, even if I wanted to, could I do?  I do not know anything else but
the boats and the nets.  Is it not so, Marie-Louise?"

"Y-yes," she said, and her eyes lifted to meet his.

"And happy!" he went on.  "Ah, Marie-Louise, with those bright eyes of
yours that belong all to me, who could be anything but happy?  _Tiens_!
You are to be my little wife, and Bernay-sur-Mer and the blue water is
to be our home, and we will fish together, and you shall sing all day
in the boat, and--well, what more is there to ask for?"

"Oh, Jean!"--she was smiling now.

"There, you see!" said Jean, and burst out laughing.  "Marie-Louise is
herself again, and--_pouf_!--the blue devils are blown away.  And now
wait until I have finished this, and I will show you something"--he
picked up the clay once more.  "Only you must not look until it is
done."

"Mustn't I?  Oh!"--with a little _moue_ of resignation.  "Well, then,
hurry, Jean," she commanded, and cupped her chin in her hands again,
her elbows propped upon the ground.

It was playfully that Jean turned his back upon her, hiding his work,
but as his fingers began again to draw and model the clay and his knife
to chisel it, the smile went slowly from his face and his lips grew
firmly closed.  It was strange that Marie-Louise should have known!  It
was true, the fishing grew irksome too often now; for those moods, like
the mood in the storm, came very often, much more often than they had
been wont to do.  He had laughed at her, but that was only to pretend,
to chase the sadness away and make her eyes shine again.  It was true,
too, as he had told her, that one must take things as they were.
Whether he wanted to fish or not, he must fish--_voilà_!  How else
could one make the _sous_ with which to live?

Oh, yes, he had laughed to make her laugh; but now, _pardieu_! it was
bringing that mood upon himself.  Where was that great city and that
great square, and what was that great statue before which the people
stood rapt and spellbound, and why should it come so often to his
thoughts and be so real as though it were a very truth and not some
queer imagination of his brain?  There were wonderful things in the
face of that bronze figure.  He leaned a little forward toward the clay
before him, his lips half parted now, his fingers seeming to tingle
with a life, throbbing, palpitant, that was all their own, that was
apart from him entirely, for they possessed a power of movement and a
purpose that he had nothing to do with.  He became absorbed in his
work, lost in it.  Time passed.

"Jean," Marie-Louise called out, "let me see it now."

"Wait!" he said almost harshly.  "Wait!  Wait!  Wait!"

"_Jean_!"--it was a hurt little cry.

He did not hear her.  There was something at the base of that statue of
his dreams that always troubled him, that the people always pointed at
as they gazed; but he had never been able to make out what it was there
at the base of the statue.  It was very strange that he was never able
to see that, when he could see the figure of the woman with the
wonderful face so plainly!

He worked on and on.  There were neither hours nor minutes--the
afternoon deepened.  There was no creek, no Marie-Louise, no
Bernay-sur-Mer, nothing--only those dreams and the little clay figure
in his hands.

And then Marie-Louise, her face a little white, timidly touched his arm.

"Jean!" she said hesitantly.

Her voice roused him.  It seemed as though he was awakened from a
sleep.  He brushed the hair back from his eyes, and looked around.

"_Mon Dieu_," he said, "but that was, strange!"  And then he smiled,
still a little dazed, and lifted around the clay figure for her to see.
"I do not know if it is finished," he said, staring at it; "but perhaps
I could do no better with it even if I worked longer."

Marie-Louise's eyes, puzzled, anxious, on Jean's face, shifted to the
little clay figure--and their expression changed instantly.

"But, Jean!" she cried, clasping her hands.  "But, Jean, that is not a
_poupée_ you have made there.  It--it will never do at all!  Ninon
Lachance would break the arms off at the first minute, and it is too
_charmante_ for that.  Oh, but, Jean, it--it is _adorable_!"

Jean was inspecting the figure in a curiously abstracted way, as though
he had never seen it before, turning his head now to this side, now to
that, and turning the clay around and around in his hands to examine it
from all angles, while a heightened colour crept into his face and dyed
his cheeks.  It was a small figure, hardly a foot and a half in
height--the figure of a fisherwoman, barefooted, in short skirts, the
clothes as though windswept clinging close around her limbs, her arms
stretched out as to the sea.  He laughed a little unnaturally.

"Well, then, since it will not do for Ninon Lachance, and you like it,
Marie-Louise," he said a little self-consciously; "it is for you."

"For me--Jean?  Really for me?" she asked happily.

"And why not?" said Jean.  "Since it _is_ you."

"Me!"--she looked at him in a prettily bewildered way.

"But, yes," said Jean, holding the figure off at arm's length.  "See,
it is a beacon--the welcome of the fisherman home from the sea.  And
are you not that, Marie-Louise, and will you not stand on the shore at
evening and hold out your arms for me as I pull home in the boat?  Are
you not the beacon, Marie-Louise--for me?"

Her hand stole over one of his and pressed it, but it was a moment
before she spoke.

"I will pray to the _bon Dieu_ to make me that, Jean--always," she said
softly.

He drew her close to him.

"It is the luck of Jean Laparde!" he whispered tenderly.

They sat for a little time in silence--then Jean sprang sharply to his
feet.

"_Ma foi_, Marie-Louise!" he called out in sudden consternation,
glancing at the sun.  "I did not know we had been here so long."  He
picked up the little clay figure hastily, placed it in the basket,
threw his coat, that was on the ground, over it, and, swinging the
basket to the crook of his arm, held out his hand to Marie-Louise.
"Come, _petite_, we will hurry back."

It was not far across the fields and down the little rise to the road
that paralleled the beach; and in some five minutes, walking quickly,
they came out upon the road itself by the turn near the rough wooden
bridge that crossed the creek halfway between the eastern headland and
the white, clustering cottages of Bernay-sur-Mer.  But here, for all
their hurry, they paused suddenly of one accord, looking at each other
questioningly, as voices reached them from the direction of the bridge
which, still hidden from their view, was just around the bend of the
road ahead.

      *      *      *      *      *

"But, my dear"--it was a man speaking, his tone a sort of tolerant
protest--"I am sure it is just the place we have been looking for.  It
is quiet here."

"Quiet!"--it was a woman's voice this time, in a wealth of irony.  "It
is stagnation!  There isn't a single thing alive here--even the sea is
dead!  It is enough to give one the blues for the rest of one's life!
And the accommodations at that unspeakable tavern are absolutely
appalling.  I can't imagine what you are dreaming of to want to stay
another minute!  I'm quite sure there are lots of other places that
will furnish all the rest and quiet required, and where, at the same
time, we can at least be comfortable.  Anyway, I'm not going to stay
here!"

"But, Myrna, you--"

"There is some one coming," said the girl.

      *      *      *      *      *

Jean and Marie-Louise were walking forward again.

"What are they saying, Jean?" asked Marie-Louise.

Jean shook his head.

"I do not know," he answered.  "It is English.  See!  There they are!"

An elderly, well-dressed man, grey-haired, clean-shaven, a little
stout, with a wholesomely good-natured, ruddy face, was leaning against
the railing of the bridge; and beside him, digging at the planks with
the tip of her parasol, stood a girl in dainty white, her head bent
forward, her face hidden under the wide brim of a picture hat.

Jean's eyes, attracted as by a magnet, passed over the man and fixed
upon the girl.  At Nice, at Monte Carlo, so they said, one saw many
such as she; but Bernay-sur-Mer was neither Nice nor Monte Carlo, and
he had never seen a woman gowned like that before.  _'Cré nom_, what
exquisite harmony of line and poise!  If she would but look up!  _Bon
Dieu_, but it would be a desecration of the picture if she were not
gloriously pretty!

The gentleman, nodding pleasantly, greeted them as they approached.

"Good afternoon!" he said smilingly, in French.

The girl had raised her head, grey eyes sweeping Marie-Louise with well
bred indifference--and Jean was staring at her.

"_Bon jour, m'sieu_!"--he spoke mechanically, lifted his cap
mechanically.

His eyes had not left the girl's face.  He could not take his eyes from
her face.  It was a wonderful face, a beautiful face, and something in
it thrilled him and bade him feast his eyes upon it to drink in its
beauty.  And, his head thrown back exposing the bare rugged neck, the
broad, sturdy shoulders unconsciously squared a little, the fine, dark
eyes wide with admiration and a strange, keen appraisement, the
splendid physique, the strength, the power and vigour of young manhood
outstanding in face and form, he gazed at her.  And her eyes, from
Marie-Louise, met his, and from them faded their expression of
indifference, and into them came something Jean could not define, only
that as the blood rushed suddenly unbidden to his face and he felt it
hot upon his cheeks, he saw the colour ebb from hers to a queer
whiteness--and then her hat hid her face again--and he had passed by.

It was as though his veins were running fire.  He glanced at
Marie-Louise.  Shyly diffident in the presence of strangers, her head
was lowered.  She had seen nothing.  Seen nothing!  Seen what?  He did
not know.  His blood was tingling, his brain was confusion.

He walked on, hurrying unconsciously.

It was Marie-Louise who spoke.

"They are of the _grand monde_," she said in a sort of wondering
excitement, when they were out of ear-shot.

"Yes," said Jean absently.

"And English or American."

"Yes," said Jean.

"But the rich people do not come to Bernay-sur-Mer where there is no
amusement for them," she submitted with a puzzled air.  "I wonder what
they are going to do here?"

Jean's eyes were on the road.  He did not raise them.

"Who knows!" said Jean Laparde.




-- IV --

STRANGERS WITHIN THE GATES

"Until to-morrow"--the words kept echoing in Jean's ears, as he hurried
now on his way back to the Bas Rhône.  "Until to-morrow"--Marie-Louise
had called to him, as he had left the house on the bluff after taking
her home.  Well, what was there unusual in that!  Though he went often,
he did not go to see Marie-Louise every evening, and it was not the
first time she had ever said it.  Why should he be vaguely conscious of
a sort of relief that she had said "until to-morrow" on this particular
occasion?  It was a very strange way to feel--but then his mind was in
the most curiously jumbled state!  That meeting at the bridge of less
than half an hour ago obsessed him.  Where had they come from, these
strangers?  How long were they going to stay?  Or, perhaps--an
unaccountable dismay suddenly seized him--perhaps they had already
gone!  But Papa Fregeau, of course, would know all that--therefore,
naturally, he was impatient to reach the Bas Rhône and Papa Fregeau.

The empty basket on his arm, for Marie-Louise had taken the beacon and
he had forgotten all about Papa Fregeau's fish, Jean paused as he
reached the bridge.  It was here that look had passed between them.  He
would never forget that.  It meant nothing--he was not a fool--it could
mean nothing.  It was only a look, only an instant in which those grey
eyes had met his--but he would never forget it!

He hurried on again.

Perhaps he had imagined that expression, that flash, that spark, that
something that was impellingly magnetic in those grey eyes.  No, he had
not imagined it; he had felt it, known it, sensed it.  In that one
instant something had passed between them that in all his life he would
never forget--it had left him like a man adrift on a shoreless sea with
the startling wonder of it.  She was of the _grand monde_--Marie-Louise
had said it.  And he was a fisherman.  She could have no interest in a
fisherman; and what interest could a fisherman--bah, it was pitifully
laughable!  But it was not laughable!  If he could only define that
look!  It was as if--_bon Dieu_, what was it!--as if she were a woman
and he were a man.  Yes; it was that!  It was only for a moment, by now
she would have forgotten it; but for that moment it had been that.
Only, whereas she would have forgotten, with him it remained.  It was
curious--her form was even more like that dream statue than was
Marie-Louise's.  If by any chance she should already have gone!  The
thought, recurring, brought once more that twinge of dismay.  Was it
strange that he should want to see her again!  True, she would never
look at him like that a second time, she had been off her guard for
that little instant when there had been no _grand monde_ and no
fisherman, but she was still the same beautiful woman, glorious in form
and face--and the allurement of her presence was like some rare,
exquisite fragrance stealing upon the senses, enslaving them.

And now, as he approached the little village, and passed the first
cottage, with the Bas Rhône in sight beyond, he found himself eagerly
searching the beach, the single street for sign of her.  But there was
no sign.  Everything about the village was as it always was every early
evening in Bernay-sur-Mer, when it was summer and the light held late.
Strewn out along the beach, the men were at work upon their boats and
nets; the children played about the doorways; through the open doors
one could see the women busy over the evening meal--nothing else!  And
surely there would have been some stir of excitement if the strangers
were still there, at least amongst the children--it was an event, that,
to Bernay-sur-Mer.  They had gone then, evidently!

Jean's eyes lifted from a fruitless sweep of the beach to fix on the
figure of Papa Fregeau emerging on the run from the Bas Rhône.

"The fish, Jean!  The fish!" the fat little man called out breathlessly.

"The fish?" repeated Jean--and then, a little sheepishly, stared into
the empty basket.

Papa Fregeau, who had reached Jean's side, was staring into it too.

"Yes--the fish!  The fish!" he shouted.  "Where are the fish you
promised to bring back?"

And then Jean laughed.

"Why," said Jean, "I--I think I must have forgotten them."

Papa Fregeau was excited.  He began to dance up and down, his fat
paunch shaking like jelly.

"Idiot!  Imbecile!" he stormed.  "Have I not had trouble enough without
this!  _Sacré bleu de misericorde_!  What an afternoon!  And you
laugh--_bête_, that you are!  And now what shall I do?"

"Do?" said Jean---and stopped laughing.  "What is the matter?"

"Matter!" spluttered the patron of the Bas Rhône.  "Matter!  Have I not
told you what is the matter?  The fish!"

"Yes, but a few fish," said Jean, eyeing the other in a half puzzled
way.  "What are a few fish that you--"

"You do not understand!"--Papa Fregeau was still dancing up and down as
he kept step with Jean, who had now started on again toward the Bas
Rhône.  "Listen!  They are Americans of Paris, they say!  They arrive
in an automobile this afternoon--mademoiselle and her father, the maid
and the chauffeur.  It is fine, they stop at the Bas Rhône and engage
rooms.  Excellent!  Nothing could be better.  There is profit in that.
I carry the trunks, the valises, a multitude of effects that are
strapped all over the automobile to the rooms, and am on the point of
sending for Mother Fregeau at Marie-Louise's.  _Sapristi_--I do not
pretend to be a cook!  They start out for a walk, the mademoiselle and
her father--and the mademoiselle, before they are out of sight from the
window, returns to say that they will not stay, that I shall repack
everything on that accursed car in readiness for their departure on the
return from their walk.  _Tourment de Satan_!--very good, I repack it.
And now you bring no fish!"

Jean shrugged his shoulders.

"Well, since they are gone, what does it matter?"

"Gone!  _Tonnerre_!"--Papa Fregeau's face was apoplectic, and his fat
cheeks puffed in and out like toy balloons.  "Gone!  Have I not told
you that they are not gone!"

"You have told me nothing"--there was a sudden, quick interest in
Jean's voice.  "They are gone--and they are not gone!  What are you
talking about?"

"I do not know what I am talking about!" snapped Papa Fregeau fiercely.
"How should I know!  It is first this, then that, then this, then
that--it is a _badauderie_!  She is crazy, the girl; the father is no
better; the maid, Nanette, is a hussy.  She slapped my face when I but
paid her a pretty compliment; and Jules, the chauffeur, is a pig who
lies on his back under the infernal machine and will not lift a finger
with the baggage.  Wait!  Listen!  Come here!"  He pulled Jean in
through the door and across the café to the bar at the far end of the
room, where he hastily decanted a glass of cognac and tossed it off.
"See!  Listen!" he went on excitedly, replenishing his glass.  "I
repack everything on the machine again, which is out there behind the
tavern.  I climb the stairs and I descend the stairs three dozen times,
there is always one more package.  And then fifteen minutes ago
mademoiselle returns from her walk alone, and waves her
hands--_pouf_!--just like that--and she says: 'Monsieur Fregeau, we
will stay; take the baggage back to the rooms!'  _C'est insupportable,
ça_!"  Papa Fregeau flung out his arms in abandoned despair.  "And now
there is no supper for them.  _Sapristi_, I am no cook; but I could
cook fish if you, _misérable_ that you are, had brought them--heh!  And
it is too late now to send for Mother Fregeau."

Jean was paying but slender attention.  They had not gone!  They were
going to stay!

"Get Madame Lachance, next door, to help you," he said absently.  Then
abruptly: "Mademoiselle returned alone, you say--and what of monsieur,
her father?"

Papa Fregeau made a gulp at his second glass.

"He is impossible!" he choked.  "With him it is the sunset!  Who ever
heard of such a thing!  He is on the beach to gaze at the sunset!  _Nom
d'un nom_, is it extraordinary that the sun should set!  But it is not
him, it is mademoiselle.  I am sure he knows nothing of all this, and
concerns himself less.  It is mademoiselle's doing.  And I have had
enough!  I will not any longer be made a fool of!"  He banged his pudgy
fist on the _comptoir_.  "Is it to stand on my head that I am patron of
the Bas Rhône!  _Sacré bleu_!  I will not support it!  I tell you that
I will not--"  Papa Fregeau's mouth remained wide open.

"Monsieur Fregeau!" a voice called softly in excellent French from the
rear door.  "Nanette is struggling with a valise on the back stairs
that is much too heavy for her, and perhaps if you--"

Papa Fregeau's mouth closed, opened again--and, in his haste to make a
bow, the cognac glass became a shower of tinkling splinters on the
floor.

"But _immediatement_!  Instantly, Mademoiselle!" cried Papa Fregeau
effusively.  "On the moment!  A valise that is too heavy for her!  It
is a sacrilege!  It is unpardonable!  Instantly, Mademoiselle, on the
instant!  On the moment!"--and he rushed from the room.

She stood in the doorway; and, from under bewitchingly half closed
lids, the grey eyes met Jean's.  And under her gaze that was quite
calm, unruffled, self-possessed now, the blood rushed tingling again
through his veins, and again he felt it mounting to his cheeks.  She
wore no hat now; and, with the sun's last rays through the doorway
falling softly upon her wealth of hair, it was as though it were a
wondrously woven mass of glinting bronze that crowned her head.

Jean's cap was in his hand.

"Oh!" she said.  "You are the"--there was just a trace of hesitation
over the choice of the word--"the man who passed us on the bridge a
little while ago, aren't you?"

There was something, a sort of indefinable challenge, in the voice and
eyes, a carelessness that, well as it was simulated, was not wholly
genuine.  Jean's eyes met the grey ones, held them--and suddenly he
smiled, accepting the challenge.

"It is good of mademoiselle to recognise me," he answered.

She stared at him for an instant, her eyes opening wide; and then, with
a contagious, impulsive laugh, she came forward into the room.

"Of course!" she cried.  "You would answer like that!  I knew it!  You
are less like a fisherman, for all your clothes, than any man I ever
saw."

"I?" said Jean, in quick surprise.  It was strange she had said that!
It was only that afternoon that Marie-Louise had said almost the same
thing.  Not like a fisherman!  Why not?  What was this imagined
difference between himself and the other men in Bernay-sur-Mer?

"Yes; you," she returned briskly.  "And now I suppose you will tell me
that you were born here, and have lived here all your life?"

"But yes, mademoiselle," he smiled again, and shrugged his shoulders;
"since it is so.  I have never been anywhere else."

"And since it is so, it must be so," she nodded.  "What is your name?"

"Jean Laparde," he replied.

"Jean"--she repeated the word deliberately.  "I like Jean," she
decided, nodding her head again.  "I like Laparde, too, but I will call
you Jean."

Jean's eyes met hers a little quizzically.  She carried things by
assault, this beautiful American girl!  There was a certain element of
intimacy, an air of proprietorship adopted toward him that somehow, at
one and the same time, quickened his pulse at the vague promise that
they would not be strangers if only she should stay in Bernay-sur-Mer,
and piqued his man-mind at the hint of mastery being snatched from him.

"All call me Jean," he said quietly.

"Then that is settled!" she announced brightly.  "Now tell me--Jean.
Is there any other place in the village besides this impossible Taverne
du Bas Rhône where we could stay for a week--a month--as long as we
liked?"

"A week--a month!"--Jean leaned suddenly toward her, an incredulous
delight unconsciously spontaneous in his voice.  "You are going to stay
that long?  But Papa Fregeau said you had no sooner arrived than you
decided to go again, and--"

"Your Papa Fregeau has a tongue that runs away with him," she
interrupted quickly.  "One may change one's mind, I suppose?  This
place will do for to-night; but afterwards--surely there is some other
place where we could stay?"

Jean shook his head.

"There is only the Bas Rhône," he said slowly.  "I--I am afraid--"

"And now, after all, you are going to be stupid!" she exclaimed
reproachfully.

What was it?  What did she mean?  It was not the words--they were
nothing.  It was the tone, her eyes, an appeal in the exquisite grace
of the lithe form bending toward him, the touch of the fingers laid
lightly on his sleeve, that look again that levelled all barriers
between them--until she was a woman and he was a man.  His mind was in
riot.  He was a fool!  And yet, fool or no, the thought would come.
Why did she want to stay now?  Papa Fregeau had said that almost on
their arrival they had decided to go on.  It was during her walk that
she had changed her mind.  What had happened on that walk to make her
change her mind?  A walk in Bernay-sur-Mer was not full of incident!
It was ridiculous, absurd, fantastical, but it was there, the thought,
sweeping him with a surge of wild emotion--was it that meeting on the
bridge?  But why?  How?  He was a rough-garbed fisherman, and she--

She laughed delightedly.

"What a frown!  How fierce you are!  Is it then such a terrible affair
to help me a little--Jean?"

"_Mon Dieu_!" cried Jean--and the words were on his lips with a rush.
"But--_no_!"

"Oh!" she murmured, and drew back a little; and the colour, rising,
glowed pink through her cheeks.  "You _are_ impulsive, aren't you?
Well, then, since you are to help me, what are we to do?"

Jean's eyes were revelling in that pink flush.  It was satisfying to
the man-mind, that--even though she were of the _grand monde_ then, a
woman was a woman after all.  It was a sort of turning of the tables,
that added to the magnetism of her presence because it put him suddenly
more at his ease.  But to help her--that was another matter.
Bernay-sur-Mer was--Bernay-sur-Mer!  _Voilà tout_!  Apart from the Bas
Rhône there was no accommodation for strangers, for there was nothing
stranger than strangers in Bernay-sur-Mer.  Since then there was no
other place for them to go, he could think of no other place.  And yet,
a week, a month--to think that she would spend that time in
Bernay-sur-Mer!  _Ciel_!  Where were his brains?

"Well?" she prompted, with alluring imperiousness.

It was the force of habit.  In trouble, in perplexity, in joy, in
sorrow, for counsel, for advice there was but one court of appeal in
Bernay-sur-Mer--the good Father Anton.  The rôle of Father Anton was
not only spiritual--it was secular.  Bernay-sur-Mer was a child and
Father Anton was its parent--it had always been so.

"I will ask Father Anton," said Jean.

"Father Anton?  Who is Father Anton?" she demanded.

"He is the curé," Jean answered.  "I do not know of any place, but
Father Anton will know if there is any, and--"

"Splendid!" she broke in excitedly.  "Let us go and ask Father Anton at
once.  Come along"--she crossed the café to the front door.  "Come
along, Jean, and show me the way."

Yes, certainly, she carried things by assault this American girl.  She
bubbled with life and vivacity.  And he was to walk with her now to
Father Anton's--half an hour ago he would as soon have dreamed of
possessing a fortune!  It was incredible!  It must be a marvellous
world that, where she came from--but no, even the women of her world
could not be like her!  The suppleness of her form, it was divine; the
carriage, the poise, the smile--it was intoxication, it went to the
senses!

"I am mad!  It is as though--as though I were drunk with wine!" Jean
muttered--and followed her across the room.

"Now where is this Father Anton of yours?"--as Jean joined her outside
the tavern.

"There," said Jean, and pointed along the street.  "Do you see the
church--behind the second cottage?  Well, it is there--just on the
other side."

She nodded--and Jean, glancing at her, found that she was not looking
in that direction at all.  Instead, she seemed wholly engaged in
watching a boat start shoreward, as it pulled away from the side of a
smack anchored out in the bay.  Father Anton might have been the last
thing that concerned her.  Jean's eyes, a little puzzled, followed
hers.  When he looked up again, the grey eyes were laughing at him.

"Is it quite safe out there?" she asked, waving her hand.

"Safe?" repeated Jean, in a bewildered way.

"Stupid!" she cried merrily.  "Yes, of course--safe!  If I am to stay
here, I cannot lie all day upon the beach and do nothing.  You have a
boat, haven't you, Jean?"

"But, yes," said Jean.

"Then I am quite sure it will be safe," she decided.  "I must have a
boat, and, of course, a boatman.  You will be the boatman, Jean.  Oh, I
really believe that, after all, Bernay-sur-Mer will be possible.  There
will be places where we can go, little excursions, and heaps of things
like that.  There, that is settled!  And now I am more eager than ever
to see Father Anton."

Yes; it was settled!  It was phrase of hers, that!  To have demurred
would have been as impossible as to have said no.  And, besides, he had
no wish to either demur or refuse.  It seemed as though he were hurried
forward captive into some strange, unknown land of enchantment.  It
staggered him, bewildered him, lured him, fired his imagination--and
there was no desire to rouse himself from what seemed like a wonderful
dream.  No woman that he had ever seen, or imagined was like her.  To
spend a day where he could feast his eyes upon her!--and did she not
now talk of many days!  Even a fisherman might lift his eyes as high as
that--since she gave him leave.  Afterwards, she would go away again;
but, _bon Dieu_, one could at least live in the present!  It would be
something to remember!  Her eyes were on him again.  He felt them
studying him.  Her hand brushed his arm.  There was a faint, enticing
fragrance of violets in the air about her.

"You are not very gallant, Jean!" she laughed out.  "Aren't you pleased
with the suggestion; or would you rather--fish?"

They had reached the church, and turned.

"I was thinking," said Jean, with unconscious naïveté, "that I was
afraid Father Anton would not know of any place."

She looked at him quickly, a flash in the grey eyes--then the lids
lowered.  The next instant she was pointing ahead of her.

"But there!" she cried out.  "There is Monsieur le Curé's house, is it
not?"  She clapped her hands in sudden delight.  "Why, it is a
play-house, only a make-believe one!  And how pretty!"

Behind the church was a little garden, full-flowered; a little white
fence; a little white gate; and, at the end of the garden, a little
cottage, smaller than any, where none were large, in Bernay-sur-Mer,
and which was white in colour, too, if one might hazard a guess for the
vines that grew over it, covering it, submerging it, clothing it in a
clinging mass of green, until only the little stubby chimney peeked
shyly out from the centre of the slanting roof.

"Yes," said Jean; "and there is Father Anton himself."

A bare-headed, silver-haired form in rusty black _soutane_, a watering
pot in hand, was bending over a bed of dahlias; but at the sound of
their approach the priest put down the watering pot, and came hurriedly
toward them to the gate.

"Ah, Jean, my son!" he cried out heartily--and bowed with old-fashioned
courtliness to Jean's companion.  "I heard there were strangers in
Bernay-sur-Mer, mademoiselle; but that they had gone on again.  You are
very welcome.  Won't you come in?"

She leaned upon the gate, smiling--and shook her head.

"No, thank you, Monsieur le Curé.  I must not stay long, or my father
will be wondering what could have become of me.  The truth is, that
I--we are in trouble, and Jean here has brought me to you."

"Trouble!" exclaimed Father Anton anxiously, and his face grew suddenly
grave.

She shook her head again, and laughed.

"Oh, it is not serious!  You see--but I must introduce myself.  I am
Myrna Bliss.  My father is Henry Bliss--I wonder if you have ever heard
of him?  We have lived for years and years in Paris."

Father Anton was genuinely embarrassed.

"I--I am afraid I never have," he admitted.

"Oh, well," she cried gaily, "you mustn't feel badly about it.  His is
entirely a reflected glory--that is what I tell him.  Art!  Everything
is art with him, painting, sculpture, literature; and, as he can do
neither one nor the other himself, he endows a school for this, or a
_société_ for that, and money exists for only one reason--the
advancement of art.  And since he calls Paris the home of art, we live
in Paris.  But now I am prattling like a school girl"--she laughed
infectiously.

The curé's old face wrinkled into smiles.

"It is very interesting, mademoiselle," he said.  "And here in
Bernay-sur-Mer I fear we know too little of such things."  He reached
across the fence and laid his hand affectionately on Jean's shoulder.
"But it is not quite all our fault, is it, Jean?  The _sous_ come hard
with the fishing, and we do not have much time for anything outside our
own little world.  I should greatly like to talk with monsieur, your
father.  Is it possible that you are to stay a little while here?"

"If we do"--the girl's face was a picture of roguish merriment--"you
will not be able to escape him, I promise you, Monsieur le Curé--so
beware!  But that is our trouble.  My father is on what he calls a
little holiday--it is really that he needs rest and quiet.  For a man
of his age, what with his own affairs and his 'art,' he is far too
active.  Very well.  Bernay-sur-Mer is ideal, only--except--Monsieur le
Curé, I am sure, will understand--except the Bas Rhône."

"Ah, the Bas Rhône!" said Father Anton.  "It is that, then--the Bas
Rhône?"

"Exactly!" she smiled.  "And so Jean has brought me to you to suggest
something else for us."

Father Anton joined his finger tips thoughtfully.

"Yes; I see," he said.  "My good friends, the Fregeaus, would do all in
their power for you, they are most excellent people; but, yes--h'm--I
see.  It is a café much more than an inn, and for a café it answers
very well; and, after all, it is not their fault that there are not
proper accommodations for guests.  Yes; I am afraid the accommodations
must be very inadequate.  But you see, mademoiselle"--Father Anton's
voice had a quaint, gentle note of pleading--"we are quite off the main
road, and it is rare that a stranger stops in Bernay-sur-Mer, and since
they are poor they could not afford, even if they had the money, to
make an investment that would bring no return.  But something
else--h'm!  Truly, mademoiselle, I do not know--there is certainly no
other place to board."

"Well, a little furnished cottage then," she suggested.  "I have my own
maid, and, if there were some one else to help a little, nothing would
suit us better.  Now, Monsieur le Curé, you are not going to be so
heartless as to tell me there are no cottages either!"

For a moment Father Anton did not answer--then his face broke suddenly
into smiles.

"But, no, mademoiselle," he declared quickly, nodding his head
delightedly at Jean, "I shall tell you nothing of the sort.  One might
say it was almost providential.  Nothing could be better!  And the
finest cottage in Bernay-sur-Mer, too!  Mademoiselle and her father
will be charmed with it--and all day I have been worrying about what to
do with Marie-Louise.  Would it not be just the thing, Jean?"

"_Ma foi_!" gasped Jean in surprise, staring from one to the other.
"The house on the bluff?"

"And what else?" said Father Anton enthusiastically.  "Listen,
mademoiselle; I will explain to you.  It is the house out there on the
headland, where Gaston Bernier lived with his niece, Marie-Louise.
Three days ago in the great storm _le pauvre_ Gaston was hurt, and that
night he died.  Marie-Louise can no longer live there alone--it is not
right for a young girl.  I thought to bring her here to live with me
and my old housekeeper; but now she can rent the house to you, and can
help with the work for she is a very good cook."

"Father Anton, you are a treasure!" cried Myrna Bliss vivaciously.  "We
will take the house.  And the rent?  Would, say, two hundred francs a
month be right?"

"Two hundred francs?" repeated Father Anton incredulously, his eyes
widening.

"Yes; and another hundred for Marie-Louise."

Three hundred francs!  It was not a large sum of money--it was a
fortune!  Father Anton, in his years of ministry at Bernay-sur-Mer,
could not remember ever having seen a sum like that all at one time;
also, it was out of all proportion to what he would have thought
Marie-Louise should demand.  The good curé's face was a picture with
its mingled emotions--he was torn between a desire that this good
fortune should come to Marie-Louise, and a fear in his honest heart
that he should be privy to the crime of extortion!

Myrna Bliss laughed at him merrily.

"Then that is settled!" she announced.  "Three hundred francs.  There
is nothing more to be said.  The only question is, will Marie-Louise
let us have the house?"

"Mademoiselle," said the old priest, his eyes twinkling, "may I say
it?--you are charming!  As for the arrangements, have no fear.  I would
go this evening, only I have some sick to visit.  But very early in the
morning I will see Marie-Louise, and by the time mademoiselle and her
father have had breakfast the house will be at their disposal."

She reached her hand across the gate to thank Father Anton and bid the
curé good evening--but Jean no longer heard a word.  His mind seemed to
be clashing discordantly; his thoughts in dissension, in open hostility
one to another.  She was to live in the house on the bluff.
Marie-Louise was to stay there, too.  One moment he saw no objection to
the plan; the next moment, for a thousand vague, fragmentary reasons,
that in their entire thousand would not form a single concrete whole
that he could grasp, he did not like it at all.

He answered Father Anton's "_au revoir_" mechanically, as they started
back for the Bas Rhône.  She was in a hurry now, all life, all
excitement--half running.

"Did I not tell you, Jean, that I would find just what I wanted?" she
called out in gay spirits.

She had told him nothing of the sort.

"Yes," said Jean.

They reached the Bas Rhône, and there, in the doorway, she turned.

"I must find my father, and tell him," she said.  There was a smile, a
flash of the grey eyes, a glint from the bronze-crowned head, a quick
little impetuous pressure on his arm, a laugh soft and musical as the
rippling of a brook; and then: "Until to-morrow, Jean."

And she was gone.

Until to-morrow!  The words were strangely familiar.  Papa Fregeau was
hurrying through the café.  Jean turned away.  He had no wish to talk
to Papa Fregeau--or any one else.  He walked down to the beach--and his
eyes, across the bay, fixed on the headland.  Yes, that was it!  Until
to-morrow--that was what Marie-Louise had said--until to-morrow.

He went on along the beach, his brain feverishly chaotic.  She had been
like a vision, a glorious vision, suddenly gone, as she had stood there
in the doorway.  Her name was Myrna Bliss.  Why not, since Father Anton
could not go that night, why not go to Marie-Louise himself and tell
her about the house?  Yes; he would do that.

He crossed the beach to the road again, and started on--walking
rapidly.  As he neared the little bridge, his pace slowed.  At the
bridge he halted.  Perhaps it would be better not to go--it would be
better left to Father Anton, that!

"_Sacré bleu_!" cried Jean suddenly aloud.  "What is the matter with
me?  What has happened?"

But he went no further along the road; for, after a moment, he turned,
retracing his steps slowly toward Bernay-sur-Mer.

And so that night Jean did not go to Marie-Louise.  But there, at the
house on the bluff, later on, Marie-Louise, after Mother Fregeau had
gone to bed, took the beacon that Jean had made and placed it upon the
table in the front room where, before, that other beacon, the great
lamp, had stood.  And for a long time she sat before it, her elbows on
the table, now looking at the little clay figure, now staring through
the window to the headland's point where sometimes she could see the
surf splash silver white in the moonlight.  It had been a happy
afternoon in many ways; but there was something that would not let it
be all happiness, for there was confusion in her thoughts.  The house
was lonely now, and Uncle Gaston had gone; it did not seem true, it did
not seem that it could be he would not open that door again and come
thumping in with the nets over his shoulders and the wooden floats
bumping on the floor--and the tears unbidden filled her eyes.  And her
talk with Jean somehow had not satisfied her, had not dispelled that
intuition that troubled her, for all that he had laughed at her for it;
and they had not, after all, settled what she was to do now that Uncle
Gaston was gone, for, instead of talking more about it, Jean had
forgotten all about her for ever so long while he had worked at the
little clay figure.

Her eyes, from the window, fastened on the beacon with its open,
outstretched arms--and, suddenly, confusion went and great tenderness
came.  He had made it for her, and he had said that--that it _was_ her.

"Jean's beacon," she said softly.

And presently she went upstairs to the little attic room, and
undressed, and blew out the candle; and, in her white night-robe, the
black hair streaming over her shoulders, the moonlight upon her, she
knelt beside the bed.

"Make me that, _mon Père_," she whispered; "make me that--Jean's beacon
all through my life."




-- V --

"WHO IS JEAN LAPARDE?"

The mattress was of straw--and the straw had probably been garnered in
a previous generation, if not in a prehistoric age!  It was so old that
it was a shifting, lumpy mass of brittle chaff, whose individual units
at unexpected moments punctured the ticking and, nettle-wise, stuck
through the coarse sheet.  It was not comfortable.  It had not been
comfortable all night.  Truly, the best that could be said for the Bas
Rhône was that, as Father Anton in his gentle way had taken pains to
make it clear, its proprietors were well-intentioned--and that was a
source of comfort only as far as it went!

Myrna Bliss wriggled drowsily into another position--and a moment later
wriggled back into the old one.  Then she opened her eyes, and stared
about her.  The morning sun was streaming in through the window.  She
observed this with sleepy amazement.  After all then, she must have
slept more than she had imagined, in spite of the awful bed.

The _lap-lap-lap_ of the sea came to her.  In through the open window
floated the voices of children at play in the street; from down on the
beach the sound of men's voices, shouting and calling cheerily to each
other, reached her; from below stairs some sort of a family reunion
appeared to be in progress.  She could hear that absurd Papa Fregeau
talking as though he were a soda-water bottle with the cork suddenly
exploded!

"Ah, _mignonne--chérie_!  You are back!  You will go away no more--not
for a day!  I have been in despair!  It is the Americans!  I have been
miserable!  _Tiens, embrasse-moi_, my little Lucille!"

There was the commotion of a playful struggle, then the resounding
smack of a kiss--and then a woman's voice.

"Such a simpleton as you are, _mon_ Jacques!"--it was as though one
were talking to a child.  "So they have put you in despair, these
Americans!  Well, then, I am back.  And listen!"--importantly.  "What
do you think?"

"Think?" cried Papa Fregeau excitedly.  "But I do not think!"

"That is true," was the response; "so I will tell you.  They are going
away this morning."

"_Merci_!" exclaimed Papa Fregeau fervently.  "I am very glad!"

"They are going to Marie-Louise's."

"To Marie-Louise's!"--incredulously.  "You tell me that they are going
to Marie-Louise's?"

"Yes; to Marie-Louise's, stupid!  Father Anton came an hour ago to make
the arrangements.  They are to rent the house, and Marie-Louise is to
remain there _en domestique_.  Now what have you to say to that?"

"_Mon Dieu_!" ejaculated Papa Fregeau, with intense earnestness.  "That
I am sorry for Marie-Louise!"

Myrna Bliss laughed softly, delightedly to herself--and then, with a
sudden little gasp, sat bolt upright in bed.  The whole thing,
everything since yesterday afternoon had been inconceivably
preposterous--and she herself preposterous most of all!  If her father
ever heard the truth of it, what a scene there would be!

She got out of bed impulsively, walked to the window, and leaned her
elbows on the sill, her brows gathered in a perplexed little frown.
Just what had happened anyway?  She had decided ten minutes after they
had arrived in Bernay-sur-Mer that she would die of ennui if she stayed
there.  They had started for a walk, she and her father, and, without
saying anything to him, she had turned back and taken it upon herself
to inform this fat, effervescent little hotel proprietor that they
would go on that afternoon.  She had intended, during the walk, to tell
her father what she had done, and, in fact, had told him; and then on
her return after that--yes, that meeting on the bridge--she had
countermanded her orders, and not only countermanded them but had even
rented a cottage!  Her father had seen nothing extraordinary in it,
which was natural enough--since he left all travelling arrangements to
her.  Indeed, on the contrary, as Bernay-sur-Mer had seemed to appeal
to him, he had been rather taken with the idea--if perhaps a trifle
sceptical as to the success of the housekeeping plan.  In a word, if
the discovery of what she believed to be suitable accommodations had
induced her to change her mind and stay in Bernay-sur-Mer, it was
perfectly satisfactory to him.  The brows smoothed out.  As far as her
father was concerned, that was all there was to it.  She had been the
practical manager ever since her mother had died five years before.

The brows puckered up again.  Her father would never give it a second
thought, he would never for an instant imagine there was any ulterior
motive for what she had done.  How could he--when the real reason was
so utterly absurd, ridiculous and unheard of!  Fancy!  What would that
select and ultra-exclusive set in Paris say?  What if it ever came to
the ears of New York!  Myrna Bliss to bury herself alive in a little
Mediterranean village that was probably not even on the map, and all at
a glance from the eyes of a--fisherman!  They wouldn't believe it.  Who
would believe it!  It was unimaginable!

Dainty little fingers reached up and drummed with their pink tips on
the window pane; the pucker became more pronounced.  Well, she _had_
done it, nevertheless.  And why was it so absurd, so ridiculous, so
impossible after all?  She would do exactly the same thing over again
without an instant's hesitation.  It was quite true the man was a
fisherman--but he did not _look_ like a fisherman.  He was magnificent!
It was not ridiculous at all--it was piquantly delightful.  Neither was
it so absurdly impossible--if she did not stay in Bernay-sur-Mer, it
would only be to choose some other place equally as tiresome--and
without even a "fisherman" to compensate for it.  What a face the man
had!  It was not merely handsome, it was--well, it was the prototype of
what the artist coterie that buzzed around her father day and night was
forever attempting to give expression to, but which, until now, she had
never believed could exist in real life.  He would be a refreshing
change this astounding man-creature, this Jean Laparde, after the vapid
attentions of the vapid men who made up her life in the social whirl of
Paris--Count von Heirlich and Lord Barnvegh, for examples, out of a
host of satellites who were constantly at her heels, because, of
course, she was an heiress; and whose attentions she endured because,
of course, some day she must marry, and because, of course again, to
marry anything less than a title, a name, fame, was quite out of the
question.  As for that, no one expected anything but a brilliant match
for her--and certainly she expected nothing less for herself.  What a
pity that they were not like Jean Laparde, those men of her world!

The fingers, from the window pane, tossed back a truant coil of hair;
the white shoulders lifted in a little shrug.  Paris--New York!  That
was all the world she knew.  New York once a year--Paris the rest of
the time.  Expatriates--for art!  That's what they were!  Art--her
father was obsessed with it.  It was a mania with him; it was the last
thing in the world that interested her.  As a matter of fact, she
couldn't seem to think of anything that particularly interested her.
One tired quickly enough of the social merry-go-round--after a season
it became inane.  One surely had the right to amuse one's self with a
new sensation--if one could find it!  The man had the physique of a
young god.  A fisherman--well, what of it?  He was splendid.  He was
more than splendid.  Even the crude dress seemed to enhance him.  It
was a face that had made her catch her breath in that long second when
their eyes had met.  Yes, of course--why not admit it?--he interested
her.  He was rugged, he was strong, and above all he was supremely a
man.  Of course, it was only a matter of a week, a month, the time they
chose to stay there; but it would be a decided novelty while it lasted.

She laughed suddenly aloud--a low, rippling little laugh.  Actually the
man was already her slave!  Imagine a man like that her slave!
Certainly it would be a new sensation.  What a strange thrill it had
given her when she had first caught sight of him on the bridge the
afternoon before.  Well, why shouldn't it have done so--a fisherman
with a face like that?  It was amazing!  Think of finding such a man in
such a situation!  Was it any wonder that she had thrilled--even if he
were only a fisherman?  In Paris, of course, she could not have done
what she had done, it would have been quite out of the question, there
were the conventions--but then in Paris one didn't see men like that!

"And since," confided Myrna Bliss to a little urchin running in the
street below, who neither saw nor heard her, "we are not in Paris, but
in Bernay-sur-Mer, which is quite another story, you see it is not
absurd or ridiculous at all, and I and my fisherman--"

She turned abruptly from the window at the sound of a knock and the
opening of her door.  It was Nanette, her maid, with a tray.

"I have mademoiselle's _déjeuner_," announced Nanette.  "Monsieur Bliss
has already finished his, and asks if mademoiselle will soon be ready.
He is waiting with Monsieur le Curé for you."

"Waiting--with Monsieur le Curé?"--Myrna's eyebrows went up in
well-simulated surprise.

"To visit the cottage mademoiselle has taken," amplified Nanette, and
her retroussé nose was delicately elevated a trifle higher.  Nanette,
very evidently, was one at all events who was not in favour of the plan.

"Oh, the cottage--of course!" exclaimed Myrna, as though suddenly
inspired.  "I had forgotten all about it.  Dress me quickly then,
Nanette."

Nanette tossed a shapely dark head.

"Is mademoiselle going to stay here long?"--Nanette at times felt
privileged to take liberties.

"Gracious, Nanette!" complained Myrna sweetly.  "What a question!  How
can you possibly expect me to know?"

Nanette arranged the tray perfunctorily.

"There was a man who left a message with that imbecile proprietor for
mademoiselle early this morning," she observed.  "Mademoiselle has
engaged a boatman?"

"A boatman?  Certainly not!" declared Myrna Bliss.  "Not without seeing
the boat--and I have seen no boat!"

"But mademoiselle engages a cottage without seeing the cottage,"
murmured Nanette slyly.

"That will do, Nanette!" said Myrna severely.  "There was but one
cottage; there are dozens of boats.  It is quite a different matter.
What did the man say?"

"That he was obliged to go out for the four o'clock fishing this
morning," said Nanette, pouting a little at the rebuke; "but that he
would go to mademoiselle at the cottage early in the forenoon."

A row of little white teeth crunched into a piece of crisp toast.

"Very well, Nanette."  Myrna's brows pursed up thoughtfully.  "You may
get out that new marquisette from Fallard's; and, I think"--she glanced
out of the window--"my sunbonnet.  And, Nanette"--suddenly
impatient--"hurry, please--since father is waiting."

Myrna's impatience bore fruit.  In ten minutes she was ready, and,
running down the stairs, went out to the street, where her father and
the curé, deep in conversation--on art undoubtedly, since her father
was doing most of the talking!--were pacing slowly up and down, as they
waited for her.

Her sunbonnet was swinging in her hand, the big grey eyes were shining,
the glow of superb health was in her cheeks.

"Good morning, Father Anton!" she called out gaily.  "What a shame to
have kept you waiting!"

The old priest turned toward her with unaffected pleasure, as he held
out his hand.

"Good morning to you, mademoiselle"--he was smiling with eyes as well
as lips.  "What a radiant little girl!  It makes one full of life and
young again; you are, let me see, you are--a tonic!"

She laughed as she turned to her father.

"'Morning, Dad!  Sleep well?"

Henry Bliss removed his cigar to survey his daughter with whimsical
reproach; then he patted her cheek affectionately.

"Fierce, wasn't it?" he chuckled.  "Those beds are the worst ever!  I
was telling the curé here about them."

"It is too bad," said Father Anton solicitously.  "It is regrettable.
I am so very sorry.  But"--earnestly--"you must not think too hardly of
the Fregeaus.  Since no guests sleep here, I am sure they can have no
idea that--"

"No; of course not!" agreed Henry Bliss heartily, and laughed.  "The
hard feelings are all in the beds--and we'll let them stay there.  Now,
then, Myrna, are you ready to inspect this new domain of yours?  And
shall we walk, or take the car?  Father Anton says it is not far."

"We will walk then," decided Myrna.

It was the walk she had taken yesterday, at least it was the same as
far as the little bridge; and for that distance she walked beside her
father and the curé, chatting merrily, but there she loitered a little
behind them.  Half impishly, half with a genuine impulse that she
rather welcomed than avoided, she told herself that it was quite unfair
to pass the little spot so indifferently.  Was it not here that this
most bizarre of adventures had begun?  She had stood here by the
railing, and he had stood there across on the other side, and--the red
leaped suddenly flaming into her cheeks.  She had never looked at a man
like that before--no man had ever looked at her like that before!  And
it had been spontaneous, instant, like a flash of fire that had lighted
up a dark and unknown pathway, which, in the momentary blaze of light,
was full of strange wonder; and which, because it was an unknown way,
and because the glimpse had shown so much in so brief an instant that
the brain fused all into confusion and nothing was concrete, resulted,
not in illuminating the way, but, the flash of light gone again, in
transforming the pathway only into a bewildering maze.

She laughed a little after a while, shaking her head.  Such an absurd
fancy!  But what an entrancing, alluring little fancy!  Decidedly, it
would be a new sensation to be lost in a maze like that--for a time.
She would tire of it soon enough--the thrill probably would not even
last as long as she would want it to.  No thrill ever did!  She bit her
lip suddenly in pretty vexation.  It was stupid of the man to go off
fishing!  Had he done it to pique her?  The idea!  He certainly could
not have the temerity to imagine that it lay within his power to pique
her.  The sunbonnet swung to and fro abstractedly from its ribbon
strings.  Wasn't it strange that he had--piqued her!

She went on after her father and the curé.  They were quite a way ahead
now, and she hastened to catch up with them.  As she drew near, she
caught her father's words.

"... Peyre on the _Histoire Générale des Beaux-Arts_, Monsieur le Curé,
I recommend it to you heartily.  It is a most comprehensive little
volume, embracing in a condensed form the story of the arts from the
time of the Egyptians down to the present day, and--"

Myrna, in spite of herself, laughed outright, at which both men turned
their heads.  Her father, incorrigible, was at it again; and, once
started, there was no stopping him.  Poor Father Anton!  For the rest
of the way he would listen to art!

"Did I not tell you to beware, Father Anton?" she cried out in comical
despair--and waved them to go on again.

She had no desire to listen to art, its relation to nature, its
relation to science, its relation to civilisation, nor, above all, to a
dissertation on the modern school.  She had heard it all before; and,
if it had not passed as quickly through one ear as it had come into the
other, her head, she was quite sure, would have driven her to
distraction.  Besides, it was much more important to think about
something else--no, not what she had been thinking about a moment ago;
but, for instance, to be practical, about this menage whose wheels,
without knowing whether they were oiled or not, she had impulsively set
in motion.  Would the cottage be at all habitable?  Would this
Marie-Louise be at all suitable?  Would Marie-Louise and Nanette get
along together?  Nanette was insanely jealous of Jules--nothing but the
fact that Jules was with them would have induced Nanette, to whom Paris
was the beginning and the end of all things, to have come on such a
trip.  Yes, there was a very great deal to think about--now that it
occurred to her!  Myrna fell into a brown study, quite oblivious to her
surroundings.

When she joined her father and the curé again, they had stopped at the
edge of the little wood on the headland, and a cottage, almost as
prettily vine-covered as Father Anton's, lay before them.

"Well, Myrna," her father called, with a smile, "I must say your plunge
in the dark looks propitious so far."

"No, no!  Not a plunge in the dark!" protested Father Anton quickly,
his eyes full of expectant pleasure on Myrna.  "That is not fair,
Monsieur Bliss!  It was on my recommendation, was it not, mademoiselle?
And now--eh?--what does mademoiselle think of it?"

It was like the imaginative conception of some painter.  The cottage,
green with climbing vines, spotlessly white where the vines were
sparse, nestled in the trees--in front, as far as the eye could reach,
the glorious, deep, unfathomable blue of the Mediterranean; nearer, the
splash of surf, like myriad fountains, on the headland's rugged point;
while a tiny fringe of beach, just peeping from under the edge of the
cliff at the far side of the cottage, glistened as though full of
diamonds in the sunlight.

"Father Anton--you are a dear!" Myrna cried impetuously.

Her eyes roved delightedly here and there.  There was a little trellis
with flowers over the back door--that little outhouse would do
splendidly as a garage.  And then the front door opened, and her eyes
fixed on a girl's figure on the threshold--and somehow the figure was
familiar.

"Who is that, Father Anton?" she demanded.

"But it is Marie-Louise--who else?" smiled the priest.  "I will call
her."

"No," said Myrna; "we will go in."

Of course!  How absurd!  She recognised the girl now.  It was the girl
who had passed them on the bridge--Myrna's sunbonnet swung a little
abstractedly again--with Jean Laparde.

Father Anton bustled forward.

"Marie-Louise," he said, as they reached the door, "this is the lady
and gentleman who are to take the house, and--"

"Oh, but I think we have seen each other before," interposed Myrna
graciously.  "Was it not you, Marie-Louise, who passed us on the bridge
yesterday afternoon?"

Marie-Louise's dark eyes, deep, fearless, met the grey ones--and
dropped modestly.

"Yes, mademoiselle," she said.

"Certainly!" said Henry Bliss pleasantly.  "I remember you too,
and--ah!"  With a sudden step, quite forgetting the amenities due his
daughter, he brushed by her into the room, and stooped over the clay
figure of the beacon.  He picked it up, looked at it in a sort of
startled incredulity, as though he could not believe his eyes; then,
setting it down, went to the window, threw up the shade for better
light, and returned to the clay figure.  And then, after a moment, he
began to mutter excitedly.  "Yes--undoubtedly--of the flower of the
French school--Demaurais, Lestrange, Pitot--eh?--which?
And--yes--here--within a day or so--it is quite fresh!"  He rushed back
to the doorway to Father Anton.  "Who has been in the village
recently?"--his words were coming with a rush, he had the priest by the
shoulders and was unconsciously shaking him.  "Was it a man with long
black hair over his coat collar and a beak nose?  Was it a little short
man who always jerks his head as he talks?  Or was it a big fellow,
very fat, and, yes, if it were Pitot he would probably be drunk?
Quick!  Which one was it?"

Father Anton, jaw dropped, dumb with amazement, could only shake his
head.  This American!  Had he gone suddenly mad?

"Good heavens, dad, what is the matter?" Myrna cried out.

He paid no attention to her.

"You, then!"--he whirled on Marie-Louise, grasping her arm fiercely.
"Who has been here?"

"But--but, m'sieu," stammered Marie-Louise, shrinking back in affright,
"no one has been here."

Myrna pressed forward into the room.

"Dad, what _is_ the--"  She got no further.

"It is true--I am a fool.  I was wrong.  Look, Myrna!"--his face
flushed, his eyes lighted with the fire of an enthusiast, he was at the
table, lifting up the little clay figure of the fisherwoman with the
outstretched arms, the beacon, in his hands again.  "Look, Myrna!  No,
I am not mad--I am only a fool.  I, who pride myself as a critic, was
fool enough for a moment to think this the work of perhaps Demaurais,
or Lestrange, or Pitot--when no one of the three even in his greatest
moment of inspiration could approach it!  There is life in it.  You
feel the very soul.  It is sublime!  But it is more than that--it is a
stupendous thing, for, since it has been freshly done, and no stranger
to these people has been here, the man who did it must be one of
themselves.  Don't you understand, Myrna, don't you understand?  The
world will ring with it.  It is the discovery of a genius.  I make the
statement without reservation.  _This is the work of the greatest
sculptor France will have ever known_!"

Father Anton had come forward a little timorously, lacing and unlacing
his fingers.  Upon Myrna's face was a sort of bewildered stupefaction.
Marie-Louise, her breath coming in little gasps, was gazing wide-eyed
at the man who held in his hands her beacon, the clay figure she had
seen Jean make.

"Is--is it true--what you say?" she whispered.

Henry Bliss looked at her for a moment, startled--as though he was for
the first time aware of her presence.

"You--yes, of course, you must know about this, as it is in the house
here," he burst out abruptly.  "You know who made it?"

"But, yes," said Marie-Louise, and now there was a sudden new note, a
trembling note of pride that struggled for expression in her voice.
"But, yes--it was Jean Laparde."

"Laparde--Jean Laparde?"--his voice was hoarse in its eagerness.
"Quick!" he cried.  "Laparde--Jean Laparde?  Who is Jean Laparde?"

A flush crept pink into Marie-Louise's face.

"He is my fiancé," she said.




-- VI --

THE GIFT

Father Anton, with a smile, his eyes twinkling, looked from one to the
other of the group as much as to say: "There!  Is that not an
altogether charming denouement?"  Myrna had yet to discover herself in
a situation to whose command she did not rise--inwardly a sudden
confusion upon her, her face expressed a polite interest.  As for Henry
Bliss, the words were without any significance whatever--it was not
what he wanted to know.

It was Marie-Louise, embarrassed, who broke the silence.

"Will mademoiselle and monsieur look through the house now, and tell me
what rooms they will occupy?"

Henry Bliss, for answer, caught Father Anton again by the shoulder.

"This Jean Laparde," he flung out excitedly, "you ought to know all
about him!  He must have done other things besides this"--he swept his
hand toward the beacon, which he had now very carefully replaced on the
table.

"But, of course!" declared Father Anton, still smiling.  "Mother
Fregeau will assure you--forever little faces and figures out of her
dough and the inside of her loaves."

"No, no--good Lord!" exclaimed Henry Bliss.  "I mean--"

"I am telling you," interrupted Father Anton mildly.  "He has been
forever at that since he was a boy, and then there are the clay dolls
for the children, of which there would be very many, at least a
hundred."

"A hundred!  A hundred clay _dolls_ by the man who did this!" shouted
Henry Bliss eagerly.  "And do you mean to say you never realised--oh,
good Lord!  Where are they?"

Father Anton's eyebrows went up in almost pitying astonishment.

"But, monsieur," he said patiently, "where would they be?  They do not
last long; and, even if the children did not break them almost
immediately, they would soon crumble to pieces like their own mud pies."

"Mud!"  Henry Bliss bent quickly over the beacon again.  "Yes, so it
is!  It is mostly mud.  It is unbelievable!  The man did not even have
modelling clay to work with!" He swung again on the curé.  "Well, where
is this Jean Laparde?  I want to see him at once!"

Myrna's laugh rippled suddenly through the room.

"Dad--don't get so excited.  Your Jean Laparde won't run away.  He's
out fishing now, but he said he would come out here this morning."

"Out fishing--come out here this morning?" repeated her father, staring
at her.  "How do you know?"

Myrna shook her finger at him in playful severity.

"If you had paid any more than the merest pretence of attention to me
last night, you would have remembered the name--no"--she laughed
again--"no, perhaps after all I didn't mention it, I'm not sure I
hadn't forgotten it myself; but he is the fisherman who took me to
Father Anton here, you know--the one I told you might possibly do as a
boatman for us while we were here."

"Great grief!  Do as a--_boatman_!" ejaculated Henry Bliss weakly.
"You, Monsieur le Curé, what time do these fishermen return?"

"But anytime, now," Father Anton answered.  "The boats go out very
early in the morning."

"Good!"  Henry Bliss pushed the curé impetuously toward the door.
"Then, you and I, Father Anton, will go right back to the village and
be there when he comes in."

"But"--Father Anton was quite bewildered--one was literally carried off
one's feet--were they all alike, these Americans!  "But," he protested
helplessly, as he was being pulled through the door, "but if the boats
are already in, and since mademoiselle said he was coming here, then--"

"Then we will meet him on the road"--they were already out of the
house.  "Now, then, Monsieur le Curé, if you are a loyal Frenchman,
step out quickly, for this is the greatest day in the history of
France, the greatest day, I tell you, in the"--the voice died away in
the distance.

Marie-Louise had not moved.  She was still standing in the centre of
the room, a strangely spellbound, dumfounded little figure.

"Mademoiselle," she ventured timidly, "what--what is--"

"I am sure I do not know," said Myrna languidly.  "Have you no shoes or
stockings?"

Marie-Louise glanced perplexedly at her small, bare feet.

"But, yes, mademoiselle--for the village sometimes, and when one walks
in the fields."

"Go and put them on, then," directed Myrna.  "And remember always to
wear them while we are here.  When you come back, I will go through the
house with you and tell you what to do."

"Yes, mademoiselle," said Marie-Louise nervously--there was a sense of
guilt upon her, but wherein lay the enormity of her offence she did not
understand.  Nevertheless, was not mademoiselle of the great world, and
since mademoiselle was displeased, surely mademoiselle must know.  She
turned hastily from the room.

"No--wait!"  Myrna's brain, for all her outward composure, was far from
calm.  It seemed as though the little stone she had started rolling
down the hill in a--well, was it a whim?--was gathering many other
stones in its course and developing into an avalanche.  She had no
desire to go into the details of the house with this Marie-Louise at
that moment; on the contrary, it was absolutely impossible.  The one
thing she wanted was to be alone--to clear all this muddle out of her
head.  "No--wait!" she repeated.  "There will be quite time enough to
attend to that when Nanette and Jules arrive; and in the meantime you
had better go down to the Bas Rhône and help Nanette if you can.  When
they are ready, come back with them."

"Nanette, mademoiselle?  But I do not know who Nanette is."

"My maid," said Myrna tersely.

"Yes, mademoiselle"--Marie-Louise, with a quick nod, was running from
the room.  "At once, mademoiselle--as soon as I have put on my shoes
and stockings."

Myrna tossed her sunbonnet on a chair, and walked over to the table to
inspect the little clay figure.  For ten minutes she stood in front of
it, now frowning, now with unconscious admiration the dominant
expression upon her face, now with puzzled bewilderment in her eyes.
Of the technique of any art she not only knew nothing, but secretly
held it in contempt; but she could not have been her father's daughter
to have lacked a sense of appreciation for the beautiful.  At the end
of the ten minutes she picked up her sunbonnet again, and walked slowly
out of the house.

At the headland's point, two hundred yards away, she sat down upon the
rocks.  She could not seem to get that little clay figure out of her
head now.  It was amazing how it took form before her eyes as
realistically as though it were still in front of her!  What a
wonderful charm and appeal there was in it!  She could see that for
herself, even if her father had not grown so excited over it.  "The
greatest sculptor in France"--well, perhaps that was a little
exaggerated!  But her father was nevertheless acknowledged to be a
critic second to none in the world of art, and he was far too chary of
his reputation to sacrifice it on a myth.  Certainly then, there was at
least a promise in the man's work.  What did her father mean to do?  He
had not rushed off that way for nothing.  It was really charming, that
little figure.  She would get Jean to let her have it, buy it from him.
Imagine possessing the first piece of his work, if the man ever
amounted to anything!

She threw a stone out into the water, watched it splash, watched the
spray of the breaking waves on what seemed like a reef away out to one
side of the headland, and watched a boat coming shoreward from out
beyond the reef again.  There was a disturbed little gathering of her
brows.  But suppose she did buy it, the thing would crumble to pieces
in a few days, and--stupid!  Of course!  Had she not been often in
those dirty _ateliers_ that were always in a mess with their clay and
their plaster?  One could send it to Marseilles to have a cast made;
and, afterwards, the cast could be sent home to Paris.

What was her father going to do with this "discovery" of his, as he
called it?  Discovery--_his_!  A little thrill ran through her.  It was
not his discovery--it was _hers_!  It was she who had discovered Jean
Laparde--in that one look.  The man's soul, a great smouldering volcano
of emotion, was in his face, his eyes.  It was amazing that this had
happened; amazing almost beyond credence that, hidden in the little
village, a fisherman, untaught, unconscious even of his own power, had
produced a piece of work that had aroused her father, one of the great
art critics in France, to such a pitch of elated excitement--but
somehow it was not in the least bit amazing that it was _Jean Laparde_
who had done it!

Her eyes fixed again on the boat, that was well in now between the reef
and the headland; and, with a sudden little gasp, she rose quickly to
her feet--it was Jean Laparde himself.  What splendid width of
shoulder, what strength, and ease, and assurance in the sweep of the
oars that bent the blades backward from swirling little eddies, that
lifted the heavy boat to send it bounding forward as though it were a
feather-weight.  It was Jean Laparde--the fiancé of Marie-Louise!

It was to the front at last, that thought!  It had been dominant from
the moment Marie-Louise had uttered the words, only she had attempted
to ignore it, lose it in the other phases of this bewildering morning.
But it was out now!  Well, what of it?  It was an impossible situation
this that she had created, was it not?  There was no use in denying
even to herself that the man had aroused in her--what should she call
it?--a desire to cultivate him a little, since he would be so new, so
fresh, so quite different.  And Marie-Louise was at the moment now
actually in her employ as--one could not call her a servant, it was
Marie-Louise's own house, and she was only there to help for a little
while at the curé's request--but still--the colour burned red in
Myrna's cheeks.

The next instant, she smiled a little.  What a simpleton she was!  What
on earth did it matter!  What could it possibly matter!  Good heavens,
she wasn't going to take this Jean Laparde away from Marie-Louise!
_She_ wasn't going to marry him!  There wasn't the slightest reason in
the world why, just when the man turned out to be an embryonic genius
and promised to prove really interesting, she should change her
attitude toward him--and, anyway, it was almost a foregone conclusion
that her father now would monopolise Jean Laparde morning, noon and
night.

She glanced at the boat--and started abruptly for the house.  To remain
there would have been almost too obviously--a meeting.  Jean had
evidently not gone to the village at all with the other boats--she
supposed there were other boats since the curé had spoken of them--but
had come directly in from wherever he had been fishing.

She reached the house and through the window watched Jean send the boat
sweeping up to the beach, leap from it, and, seemingly without
exertion, pull it higher over the sand.  He turned then, searching the
house with his eyes; and suddenly placed his hands trumpet-fashion to
his lips.

"Marie-Louise!  Ho, Marie-Louise!" she heard him shout, as he came
running up the cliff path from the beach.

Virile in movement, a striking figure, there seemed all of command,
something heroic even in the rugged strength, something absolutely
undauntable about the man.  And then she laughed merrily to herself, as
she stepped to the door.  What a change!  Who would have believed it!
Jean, at sight of her, had stopped as though he had been struck,
self-consciousness mocked at the air of command, and through the brown
tan of his face crept the red.

"Oh, it is you, Jean!" she exclaimed.

Mechanically he reached up for his cap.

"I--I did not think that mademoiselle had got here yet," he said, the
dark eyes in their steady gaze disconcertingly at variance with his
stammering speech.

"We've been here ages," she told him quickly.  "But the others have
gone back again.  Marie-Louise has gone to help Nanette with the
things.  And my father rushed off with that delightful old curé of
yours to look for you."

"Rushed off to look for me?" echoed Jean in astonishment.  "But I told
Jacques Fregeau to tell you that I would come here as soon--"

"Yes, of course, to look for you--but not for the purpose you imagine!"
she broke in smiling, and shook her head reproachfully at him.  "Jean,
do you know that I am quite angry with you!  Come here!" She led the
way into the house.  "Now!"--pointing to the clay figure on the table.
"Is not that your work?"

"But, yes, mademoiselle"--there was only a cursory glance at the
beacon; his eyes were on this fresh, glorious, wonderful woman, whose
white dress of some marvellous texture draped about her with such
exquisite, dainty grace ... and the throat was bare, and full, and
white as ivory is white ... that glint of bronze that was always
playing over the massive coils of hair ... the playful severity in the
pursed lips ... it was intoxication, it was fire ... he had been drunk
with it all the night, all that morning in the boat while he had fished.

"Then why did you not tell me about it last night?" she demanded.

With a start, he shrugged his shoulders--and perplexity came.

"But it is nothing--that," he said slowly.  "What was there to tell,
mademoiselle?"

"Nothing!"  She stared at him in amazement.  "Do you really mean to say
that you think it is--nothing?"

"But, of course!" he said simply.

And then suddenly she smiled, and shook her head at him again.

"Did I not tell you last night, Jean, that you were less like a
fisherman than any man I had ever seen?"

"Yes; mademoiselle said that."  Was there a word of hers that he had
forgotten!

"Very well, then," she began magisterially, "since you think nothing of
that little statue, I will tell you what I think.  It is so much more
than 'nothing' that I am going to buy it from you.  It is"--her voice
changed suddenly, soft in abandon, full in admiration--"oh, Jean, it is
superb, magnificent; it is the most beautiful thing I have ever seen;
and--and I think I want it more than I have ever wanted anything
before."

She had come closer to him, touched him, her hand was on his sleeve,
her cheeks were flushed.  That look--God, was he mad?--that _same_ look
was in her eyes again.  Yes, he was mad--with a madness that bade him
sweep her into his arms and crush her there in all her alluring beauty.
He was white--he felt the blood leave his face.  She wanted
that--wanted that bit of clay that _he_ had made!

"It is not for sale, mademoiselle," he said hoarsely; "it is yours."

"No, no, Jean!" she cried.  "You do not understand.  It is worth--oh, I
do not know how much--ever so much money.  Father will be able to tell
us.  It is on account of this that he rushed off to try and find you.
He is terribly excited about it."

His hand at his side was clenched; his arm was rigid--he dared not move
it for fear she might draw her hand away--it would not come often, a
touch of intimacy like that.  What did it matter about her father!
What did anything matter--but that fiery tide that was whipping through
his veins.

"It is good of monsieur, it is good of mademoiselle to praise it," he
muttered.

"But it is not good of us!" she asserted earnestly.  "Really, I must
try to make you understand, Jean.  I can't take it under false
pretences, you know--you might hate me for it afterwards.  I am sure
you would.  My father says it is a wonderful piece of work--that you
are a great artist."

"I?" said Jean--and suddenly in a sweep of passion laughed a little
fiercely.  "Impossible!  But it is enough that mademoiselle, for some
reason that I cannot understand, thinks so much of it.  It is hers."

"And I tell you that it is not impossible!" she insisted seriously.
"Listen, Jean"--her hand closed a little tighter on his arm.  "Suppose
that I took it, accepted it, and some day you should find that it had
become a tremendously famous thing--what then?"

"It would still be unworthy of mademoiselle," he answered, in a low
tone.

With a little gasp, she drew back a step and looked at him--but it was
the grey eyes that dropped, and for a moment to Jean, unconscious of
his own tense poise, the rapt burning in his eyes, she seemed all
glorious with that play of colour now that was even in the pulsing
throat.  But the next instant she was smiling radiantly.

"Thank you, Jean," she said naïvely.  "I will take it very gladly, and
I will always keep it.  Father will have a cast of it made at once,
and--" she stopped suddenly, turning quickly toward the door.
"Listen!" she said.  "That's the motor, isn't it?  Marie-Louise must
have met it on the road."

An automobile had come to a stop by the side of the house; and, a
moment later, a girl's voice, high-pitched in sarcasm, reached them.

"_Ma foi_!  Fancy!  She owns the house!  What an aristocrat!  No doubt
she will expect mademoiselle and monsieur to invite her to table with
them next!  Oh, _là, là_, but you have lots to learn, _ma petite
paysanne_!"

"Oh, let her alone, Nanette!" exclaimed a man's voice sharply.  "She
has done nothing but answer your own questions, except"--with a
laugh--"that she has ridden on the front seat!"

It seemed to come with a shock to Jean that snatch of conversation, as
something cold, chilling the fire that but an instant gone had been
raging within him.  It was an arraignment of himself, a slap in the
face, sharply, curtly given, a reminder that for all his temerity he
was--a fisherman.  Myrna had gone to the front door.  He swept his hand
in a dazed way across his eyes, then straightened suddenly--it was a
spell that he had been under.  Nor was the spell gone; but now, at
least, he was in control of himself.  He walked across the room to
where Myrna stood.

"Mademoiselle," he offered quietly, "can I help with the baggage?"

She turned to him, smiling.

"Oh, if you will, Jean!" she cried gratefully.  "Please help Jules with
the trunks.  And afterwards"--her hand was on his sleeve again--"though
I must see about arranging things, you mustn't go away.  Father will be
back shortly, and you must wait."

"I will wait," said Jean.




-- VII --

WHERE GLORY AWAITS

His back to the cliff, and leaning against the gunwale of his boat,
which on landing a little while ago he had drawn up on the beach, Jean
dug abstractedly at the sand with the toe of his boot.  He had helped
Jules, the chauffeur, to carry the baggage into the house, where Myrna
Bliss, her maid and Marie-Louise were now busily engaged
within--occasionally he could hear one or other of their voices--and he
was waiting.  What for?  He did not know.  He had promised her that he
would wait.  Her father wanted to see him because he made _poupées_ out
of clay, and because he had made that little statue which, somehow, had
so delighted her.  It was very curious--very curious that a little
thing like that should have taken their fancy!

His hand passed nervously across his forehead.  But that was of no
account, the statue!  There were other things.  He was living in a
dream--no, not a dream--something much more vital than a dream.  From a
dream one awoke, and the dream was dispelled.  He was awake now and the
spell was still upon him.  In her presence he lost his reason, his
being seemed to become a seething furnace of passion that consumed him;
away from her, some strange, magnetic power kept bidding him return,
kept his mind picturing her, kept his thoughts upon her.  It was but
half an hour ago that, alone with her in the cottage, he had almost
utterly lost control of himself.

A hot flush was on his cheeks.  It was bad, that!  Some day he would
lose control of himself completely; some day the impulse to crush that
ravishing form in his arms, to look deep into those laughing,
self-possessed grey eyes until the laughter and the self-possession
were gone and he was master, would prove too strong for him.  And
then--what?

His hands clenched at his sides, the broad shoulders sloped a little
forward.  Well--what then?  His brain would not answer him, save only
with that persistent "she was a woman and he was a man."  He laughed
shortly aloud.  Was that true?  How true was it?  He glanced mockingly
at his clothes; his hands unclenched, and, feeling in a sort of
tentative way, slid along the gunwale of the boat.  Yes; it was quite
evident that he was what he had always been, what he always would be--a
fisherman.  It was quite evident too that he was mad.  It was only last
night that he had seen her for the first time, only since last night
that this enchantment had fallen upon him--and now it possessed him,
mind, soul and body.  One could not credit that!  He laughed out
again--and suddenly the laugh died on his lips.

He had heard no step upon the sand, but a hand now touched his arm.  He
turned quickly.  It was Marie-Louise.  He had forgotten all about
Marie-Louise--since yesterday evening.  He had seen her of course since
then, had walked home with her after that meeting on the bridge, had
called out for her when he had landed here on the beach a little while
ago, but for all that Marie-Louise had been forgotten.

"Jean"--she was speaking in a low, anxious voice--"it's--it's not true,
is it, Jean?"

The dark eyes were trying to smile through a troubled mist; the lips,
that he remembered he had likened yesterday to the divinely modelled
lips of that dream statue, were quivering now.

Jean stared at her.  What would she be like if she were dressed in
clothes, marvellous, dainty things, such as Myrna Bliss wore, with
little shoes and silken ankles?  She was pretty of course, Marie-Louise
had always been pretty; but there was not the physical thrill, the
witchery in the eyes that turned his head.  She was more sober--yes,
that was it--more sober.  Marie-Louise took things more seriously, and--

"Jean!"  She seemed almost frightened now in her appeal.  "Did you not
hear me?  Jean--it isn't true, is it?"

"True?" Jean roused himself with a little start.  "What is not true?  I
do not know what you are talking about."

"The beacon, Jean"--she spoke hurriedly, breathlessly now.  "A few
minutes ago mademoiselle told me to put it in the room she has chosen
for herself, and to be very careful of it because--because"--her voice
broke suddenly--"because she said that you had given it to her.
Jean--it's not true, is it?"

For a moment Jean did not speak.  There were tears in her eyes!  A
twinge of guilty confusion seized him.  Yes, it was so--Marie-Louise
had been forgotten.  Yesterday he had given it to Marie-Louise.  But
who would have thought it would make any difference to her--a thing
like that!  She was perhaps angry for the moment, but it would be only
for the moment.

"_Mais, sacré nom_!" he exclaimed, and forced a laugh.  "And what of
it?  It is nothing!  I will make you another."

She did not answer; but into the brown eyes came a miserable hurt, and
into the face a sudden whiteness.  It was only the day before that he
had given it to her, and had said it was a beacon, and that the beacon
was herself with arms outstretched to welcome him always.  It had meant
so much to her--and now it seemed to have meant so little to Jean.

Jean shifted uneasily, as she did not speak.

"I will make you another, Marie-Louise," he blurted out appeasingly.
"To-day--to-morrow--whenever you like, I will make you another.  Then
it will be all right, eh, _petite_?"

She shook her head--and the words came very slowly.

"You can never make another beacon, Jean."

"How--not another?" he cried impetuously.  "I can make a thousand!  Did
I not tell you that it was you--has it not those lips that I could
fashion even in the dark, even if you were far away from me!  _Tiens_,
do you not see--I could make a thousand!  And to-morrow you shall have
another."

The dark eyes were full.

"Was it yours to give, Jean?" she asked.

It was true!  He had nothing to say to that.  She was crying.  He was
angry now because he could say nothing, because there was no excuse for
what he had done--and yet he would do it again.  But he could not tell
Marie-Louise that though, _pardieu_!  She would only cry the harder.
And because she was right and he had nothing to say, he groped, angry
with himself, for some defence.

"Ah!" he burst out sharply.  "So that is it!  Yesterday you would have
thought nothing of it, but now you have been listening to what they
say, and you believe it all--that it is worth a great deal of money,
maybe a hundred francs, eh?  Well, it is not--it is worth nothing!  You
have nothing to cry over."

Wide-eyed, as though a whip-lash had curled across her face, she drew
back, her small hands shut tightly at her sides, as she looked at him.
And then somehow that little prayer that she had prayed to the _bon
Dieu_ last night came back to her--"make me that, _mon Père_; make me
that--Jean's beacon all through my life"--and the bitter words that
were on her lips were crowded back, and she turned slowly away.

But now Jean caught her arm.

"No, no, Marie-Louise, I did not mean that!" he cried penitently.
"See, I did not mean that!"

She made no answer.  Her head was averted; her eyes fixed far out over
the water.

Jean bit his lips.  Certainly he had had no right to give it away, but
it was a small matter to make such a fuss over, and he had already
promised her another.  Was it possible that she had sensed anything of
the wild passion that had come upon him for this beautiful American!
Was she already jealous?  Well, it was easily knocked out of her head,
that--if one took the bull by the horns!  And if he were mad it was no
reason that hurt should come to Marie-Louise because of it.  Some day
it would be all over this madness, and was it not Marie-Louise and he
who were to make their little home together?  He forced a laugh again,
and caught her shoulders and drew her closer.

"Confess, Marie-Louise," he said teasingly, "that it is because I gave
it to another woman.  Is it not so, eh?  That you are--oh, _là,
là_!--that little Marie-Louise is jealous of mademoiselle."

Her head lifted, a new light suddenly in her eyes--one of incredulous
amazement.

"Jealous of mademoiselle!" she repeated wonderingly.  "Of mademoiselle
who is of the _grand monde_ and so far above us and not of our world at
all--and you who are a fisherman!  How could I be jealous?  How could
such a thing be possible?  Oh, Jean, don't you understand, it is not
that you gave it to her--it is that you gave it at all."

"But what does it matter, then," demanded Jean, inwardly relieved,
"since I will make you as many more as you please?  To-morrow you shall
have another much better than this one."

Footsteps sounded from the gravel walk on the cliff above; and
Marie-Louise, glancing around, lifted Jean's hands from her shoulders.

"I have told you, Jean, that you can never make another," she said,
with a little catch in her voice; then hurriedly: "It is mademoiselle
and her father coming to see you.  I must go."

"And I have told you," declared Jean, with sudden, fierce assertion,
"that I can make a thousand, and all better than this one!"

She bent her head to hide the blinding tears that were filling her eyes
again.  It meant nothing to him, that which had been so great a pledge
to her.  It was only a _poupée_, a clay doll, one of dozens that he had
given to the children to amuse them.  And the things he had said about
it meant nothing--they had only been words--only words, but she could
not forget them.  A little sob rose in her throat, and was choked
bravely back.  They were coming down the path now, mademoiselle and her
father, and she must go.

"You do not understand," she said brokenly--and, turning, ran quickly
along the beach.

For a space Jean watched her as she sped over the sand, until, ignoring
the path, she climbed lithely up the rocks at the far end of the beach,
and disappeared in the direction of the house.  His hand, a knotted
lump, drawn back for a smashing blow on the gunwale of the boat, a blow
that should relieve his feelings, opened hesitantly instead and passed
a little dazedly across his eyes.

"_Sacré maudit_!" he muttered in slow earnestness under his breath.

Since last night the world was upside-down!  Since last night he did
not know himself!  He knew nothing!  Only that all Bernay-sur-Mer was
changed.  That everything was changed.  That he had made Marie-Louise
cry.  That they had talked about that accursed piece of clay that had
made Marie-Louise cry, as though it were worth talking about!

"_Sacré maudit_!" muttered Jean again.  "What does it all mean?"

And then he was watching her, this glorious American, coming now along
the beach toward him with the man who Marie-Louise had said was
mademoiselle's father.

"Jean!"--she was calling out to him.  "Here is father at last!  Did you
think we were never coming?"

Two hands fell upon his shoulders, holding him off at arms' length; and
the man, with frank eagerness, was staring into his face.  Over her
father's shoulder, Myrna was laughing roguishly.

"So you are Jean Laparde?" Henry Bliss exclaimed heartily.  "Well,
well!  My daughter told me I would lose half my surprise when I had a
good look at you, and I am free to admit she was right."  One hand fell
from Jean's shoulder, caught Jean's hand and wrung it in a genial grip.
"Well, Jean, my boy, I want to say to you that if you will listen to
me, this will be a day that you will remember as long as you live."

From one to the other Jean stared bewilderedly.

"It is to the clay figure that monsieur refers, I know," he said
slowly; "but I do not understand.  Mademoiselle was kind enough to
praise it, but--"  He shrugged his shoulders deprecatingly.

"But--nothing!" laughed Henry Bliss impulsively.  "Here--sit down!"  He
sat down himself on the boat's gunwale, and turned to his daughter.
"Myrna, we're going to talk business--are you going to stay?"

"Of course, I'm going to stay!" she declared merrily, perching herself
beside her father and smiling up at Jean, who still remained standing.
"It will take both of us to convince him.  Jean, father wants to take
you to Paris."

"To Paris!"--the words came from Jean with a sort of startled jerk.
His eyes searched the two faces for an instant uncertainly, and then he
smiled incredulously.  "Mademoiselle is pleased to have a little joke
with me--yes?" he said quietly.

It was Henry Bliss who answered.

"Indeed, she is not!" he asserted, with brisk emphasis.  "That is
exactly what I have to propose, my boy.  My daughter tells me she
cannot make you believe that the superb little statue you have made
amounts to anything more than a gouged-out piece of mud.  I'm not so
much surprised that you have not sensed its actual worth, for I think
that almost invariably the really big men in art, the men of real
genius, are the last to appreciate themselves; but the astounding thing
is that you have seen nothing in it at all.  As a matter of fact, I
can't believe it.  It is impossible!  It is simply that you have given
it no thought.  Think a little about it, Jean.  How did you come to
make it?  How did you conceive it?  Where did you get your model?"

"But I do not know," said Jean a little absently--something, the fire,
the enthusiasm, the earnestness in the other's voice was kindling a
strange response within him.  "I do not know.  I think it was the
bronze statue in the great square of the city."

"The--what?" demanded Henry Bliss quickly.  "What city?  I know them
all--and I do not recall anything that could have served as a model for
you."

"And you told me, Jean," Myrna added, wagging her finger at him in
pretty reproach, "that you had never been away from Bernay-sur-Mer."

Jean laughed uncomfortably, self-consciously.

"It is nothing!" he said.  "You do not understand.  It is foolish!  The
statue and the square and the city are only in the dream that comes
sometimes."

"Ah--a dream!" ejaculated Henry Bliss, with a quick nod of his head.

"Oh, Jean!"  Myrna clapped her hands delightedly.  "Tell us about it."

"There is nothing to tell, mademoiselle," he replied, colouring.  "It
is just a dream that comes sometimes when I am fishing, when I lie
awake at night, when I am not thinking of it.  That is all,
mademoiselle.  It means nothing."

"It means a great deal!" said Henry Bliss, jumping excitedly to his
feet.  "And at least it should help you to understand that it is not so
impossible after all when I tell you that, barring little crudities of
technique that are a paltry consideration, there is no sculptor in
France to-day could produce a piece of work comparable to that which
you have done."

Jean's lips were slightly parted.  Excitement was upon him too.  A
strange stirring was in his soul.

"But I cannot believe that," he said in a low voice.

Henry Bliss's hands were on Jean's shoulders once more, pressing them
in a hard, earnest grip.

"Nevertheless, it is true!" he asserted forcibly, "You do not know me;
but those who do could tell you that I am qualified to speak.  And I
tell you that it is true.  I tell you that in Paris fame, wealth, the
greatest name in France awaits you!  You are through to-day with this
life forever, my boy, if you will come with me to Paris."

Fame, wealth, the greatest name in France!  Jean felt the blood leave
his face.  His brain seemed to whirl and to be afire.  Yes, those were
the words, and the man was not playing with him; but it was some wild
hallucination, some bizarre mistake.  To-day, to be through with the
hard, penniless life of a fisherman forever--and to work hereafter only
with what before had been his play!  No, that was not true--it could
not be true.  He meant well, this man, the father of the girl whose
eyes seemed to burn into his now and insist too that it was true, but
the little statue had been too easily done to be anything more than
perhaps a pretty little thing.  Fame, a great name--that strange
stirring of his soul again!  God, why had this man aroused that thought
within him, when it was not, could not be true?

"Monsieur," he said, and his voice in its hoarseness sounded strangely
in his own ears; "monsieur, has made a mistake.  It cannot be so."

"Think so!" returned Henry Bliss bluntly.  "I do not make mistakes of
that kind, my boy.  But I will convince you.  In a few days you will
see.  I have telegraphed for some of the famous critics of France, men
of the Academy, men whose names are known all over Europe, and they
will tell you what I have told you--and their despair that it is I, not
they, who have discovered you will be so pitifully genuine that even
you will understand.  And to-morrow we will motor to Marseilles and get
some modelling clay for you, and you will see for yourself what you can
do with that.  And then, Jean, you will go to Paris with me--and work."

"If it were true, if it should be true," said Jean numbly, "still I
could not go.  One does not make _sous_ enough at the fishing to go to
Paris."

"But, great heavens!" ejaculated Henry Bliss.  "That is precisely what
I am offering you, young man--money.  I am rich.  I will pay every
expense.  I will establish you."

Jean shook his head.

"I could not do that--take your money," he said simply.

"Couldn't take it!" exploded the American earnestly--and then he
laughed--and then grew serious once more.  "Listen, my boy!  I do not
want you to think for a moment that this is a purely charitable little
scheme on my part--far from it!  It is most of it, I am afraid, utter
selfishness.  I love art--for many years I have devoted myself to it.
I cannot create myself--God knows the miserable attempts and the
miserable failures that have been mine!--and so I have tried to help
others to do what I could not do myself"--Henry Bliss was smiling now
in a kindly, wistful way.  "And now to discover the greatest sculptor
of the age, to bring him out of obscurity into fame and power--can you
not see, Jean, how selfish I am?  And so why do you stand there
hesitating?"

Into Myrna's face, for the girl had risen and was now standing beside
them, into the man's face so close to his, Jean stared--and then his
eyes swept about him, over his surroundings.  It was magnificent, but
it was not reality--for here was the beach, and here was the boat, and
in the boat were his nets, and there was the nick in the handle of the
oar where he had fended off that night from the Perigeau Reef, and out
there, surf-splashed, was the reef itself, and his clothes were the
same rough, coarse clothes that he always wore just like every other
fisherman in Bernay-sur-Mer.  It was magnificent, but it was not
reality--and yet his heart was pounding with mighty hammer beats, and
the blood was surging fiercely through his veins.

"And as for the money," Henry Bliss went on quietly.  "You need have no
qualms on that score, my boy.  Pay it back by all means, if you'll feel
the better for it.  In a year, two years, you'll be a wealthy man.
Why, Jean, don't you understand--there isn't one of the men who will be
here shortly but would pay you any price you chose to ask for that
little statue you gave to my daughter here?  So, even on a basis of
dollars and cents alone, as it stands now, you couldn't owe me
anything, don't you see?"

What were they saying to him!  Fame, a great sculptor, wealth, a name,
his name, the name of Jean Laparde to be known throughout all France!
Why did it come back to him now, that night of the great storm when he
had stood and watched the scene, rapt and awed, on his way to
Marie-Louise?  What strange blasphemy was that, that had been his, that
had envied the _bon Dieu_ the creation of that mighty picture?

"Jean"--Myrna had caught his arm, her head was between her father's now
and his, the soft, bronzed hair for an instant brushed his forehead,
her breath was on his cheek, the grey eyes were smiling into
his--"Jean, wouldn't you like to go to Paris?"

To Paris!  She lived in Paris--she was always in Paris--always there.
A day, a week, two weeks, a month he would have seen her here--in Paris
there would be neither days nor weeks nor months to count.  The grey
eyes were veiled suddenly, demurely, under the long lashes--but the
little hand on his arm, with a quick, added pressure, remained.  His
head swam dizzily--there was an untamed, pulsing elation upon him, a
greed for her that racked and tormented him, a greed to clasp her head
between his hands and lift up her face and press kiss after kiss upon
those eyelids, that mouth, until in the very insatiability of his
passion she should fling her arms around his neck and return his
embrace!

"Yes--_yes_!" he said tensely, fiercely.  "_Mon Dieu_, yes--I would
like to go to Paris!"

Her hand fell from his arm.

"Oh, Jean--I'm so glad!"--it seemed as though she were whispering
softly to him.

"Good!" cried Henry Bliss enthusiastically, with a double slap on
Jean's shoulder.

Jean did not speak.  It was not easy in an instant to quench that fire
that was devouring him, it was not easy to understand that to-day all
his life was to be changed.  He looked at Myrna--the grey eyes were
gaily mocking him, as she nodded her head.  He looked at her
father--Henry Bliss was laughing ingenuously like a pleased school-boy.

"I know just how you feel!" said Henry Bliss genially.  "All up in the
air--eh?  Well, I feel that way myself.  It is the most amazing thing
that ever happened!  It seems as though there were a dozen questions I
wanted to ask you all at once.  And to begin with, those _poupées_ now,
how did you--no, hold on!  Myrna, we'll motor over to Marseilles for
the clay to-day, instead of waiting until to-morrow.  We'll have
something else to show old Bidelot by the time he gets here!  You go up
to the house and order an early luncheon.  Jean will join us, and we'll
have from now to Marseilles and back again to talk."

"Splendid!" agreed Myrna.  "You will, won't you, Jean?"

"I?" said Jean, in sudden dismay.  He, to eat with the _grand monde_!
But perhaps he had not understood--they would give him lunch with Jules
and Nanette and Marie-Louise.  He had heard Nanette make that very
plain to Marie-Louise a little while ago.  "I--I have my dinner with
me," he stammered, and pointed to a paper parcel in the stern of the
boat.  "I will be ready when mademoiselle and monsieur are ready."

"Oh, will you?" laughed Henry Bliss.  "Well, I guess not!  You'll come
up and lunch with Myrna and me."

"No," said Jean, embarrassed, "I--"

"Yes, you will," insisted Henry Bliss.

"Why, Jean," expostulated Myrna, "of course you will, we--" she stopped
abruptly.  "Oh!" she exclaimed.  "I think I know!  It's what that
stupid Nanette said to Marie-Louise about sitting at table with us,
isn't it?"

"What's that?" demanded Henry Bliss quickly.  "What has Marie-Louise to
do with--h'm--yes--I remember"--his face screwed up perplexedly.  "Her
fiancé, she said--h'm--yes--it _is_ a bit awkward, isn't it?"

"It's nothing of the kind!" declared Myrna, and, with a laugh,
possessed herself of the paper parcel from the boat.  "It's quite a
different matter.  If only half of what father has said is true, Jean,
it would be an honour for any one to have Jean Laparde as a guest.  And
anyway I've got your lunch now!"  She waved it in the air, threatening
him merrily with it; then turned, and ran toward the house.  "You come
when you're called, sir!" she flung back over her shoulder, laughing
again.




-- VIII --

SHADOWS BEFORE

Who, in all France, a week ago, had heard of Bernay-sur-Mer?  Upon
whose lips to-day was not the name of that little Mediterranean
village?  Men, the great men of France, came at the bidding of their
confrere, the American millionaire art-critic; came sceptically--and
stayed to wonder.  And because there were no accommodations in
Bernay-sur-Mer, they made their headquarters at Marseilles, and their
daily pilgrimages from there; an arrangement that, if in a measure
inconvenient, was not without its compensation, for at Marseilles was
being made the plaster cast of that exquisite little figure, fashioned
so amazingly from scarcely more than mud, that marked a new epoch to
them in the world of sculpture, the birth of a supreme genius, a
surpassing glory for the art of France!

They came and watched Jean at his work; for there was clay now such as
Jean had never imagined, clay that seemed to give form itself, of its
own initiative, to wonderful conceptions.  They watched and marvelled;
and at night they carried him back with them to Marseilles to fête him,
until indeed to Jean the world of yesterday was as some vast haze,
befogged, that had shut down behind him.

"In a year, with the study of technique in Paris!" murmured Henry Bliss
ecstatically.

And old Bidelot, seventy years of age, grizzle-haired, the most
caustic, bitter critic of them all, stormed in his wrath.

"Technique!  You talk of technique--for _him_!  He is a school in
himself--a school that will revolutionise the art.  You talk of
technique for a genius awakened out of the sleep of ignorance, who in a
day accomplishes undying work that no other man in Paris, in Rome--bah!
where you will--could accomplish in twice a lifetime!  You are senile,
my poor friend Bliss--you are in your dotage!"

Jean Laparde!  Was it possible that this was Jean Laparde?  The simple
fisherfolk stared awe-struck at each other, at the metamorphosis that
had come to Bernay-sur-Mer, at the great people who came and went, to
whom one instinctively lifted one's hat--the great people who now
lifted their hats to Jean.  It was true!  Could they not see with their
own eyes?  One, too, then, should lift one's hat to Jean.  And did not
the good Father Anton read to them from the newspapers that all France
was ringing with the name of Jean Laparde?

"_Sacré nom d'un miracle_!" swore Pierre Lachance heavily.  "And once
he made clay _poupées_ for little Ninon!  _Bon Dieu_, think of that!"

Bernay-sur-Mer had set Jean apart, above itself.

But the old curé was troubled in his heart.  And one night, after a
week had gone since the American strangers had come to Bernay-sur-Mer,
Father Anton shook his head over his newspaper as he read of Jean
Laparde--and found difficulty with his spectacles, for his thoughts
were of Marie-Louise.

It was only a week ago that she had come to him so happily, so gladly,
the proud light in her eyes, to talk of the great thing Jean had
done--and she had changed a great deal in the week.  The proud light
would come back quickly enough at mention of Jean, but she had grown
strangely quiet and silent.  And Jean, too, had changed.  It seemed, as
indeed it was true, that Jean was no longer one of the village.

The old priest took off his offending spectacles, rubbed them with his
handkerchief, and replaced them only to find that the mistiness was in
his own wet eyes.

Jean did not seem the same in his new clothes.  Of course, it was quite
natural that Jean should have discarded his fisherman's dress.
Mademoiselle Bliss had said very truly that though it might be
picturesque in Bernay-sur-Mer, in Paris it would be only eccentric; and
besides, to go to Marseilles with his new friends of his new world, one
needed to be dressed as they were not to be ridiculous.  Monsieur Bliss
had been very generous.  The American was very whole-heartedly
interested in his protégé.  Jean would lack for nothing that either
money or influence could procure.

But it was not only the clothes--Jean himself had changed.  Father
Anton shook his head again slowly.  It had come gradually during the
week, and he, who loved Jean as a son, had not failed to see it.  At
first it had been amazement, bewilderment, incredulity, then a dawning
belief in the genius of his power that they preached to him, and then a
fierce assurance that it was so; it had begun with wonder at the
camaraderie with which the famous men who had come there treated him,
at the respect that Bernay-sur-Mer paid to him--and it had ended with
the acceptance of it as his due, and had come to be looked for with a
tinge of arrogance as though he had drunk of heady wine.  Yes, it was a
change!  Jean was afire now, a different man, consumed, possessed with
the lure of fame, the golden vista that was before his eyes, steeping
his soul in it, reaching out to it, straining toward it like a young
eagle that suddenly liberated from captivity takes wings to the great
void.

And so the paper slid unheeded to the floor from the old priest's knees
that night, a week after the American strangers had come to
Bernay-sur-Mer, and the spectacles were removed again--but this time
the eyes were wiped.  He was glad for Jean, proud in his love for the
greatness that was to come--but somehow in his heart there was sadness,
too.  It seemed that between Marie-Louise and Jean a shadow crept, and
lengthened, and there was a parting of the ways.

"I love you both, my children, Marie-Louise and Jean," the old curé
whispered.  "I am an old man.  Perhaps I am foolish in my fears.  I
pray the good God for you both."




-- IX --

FORKED ROADS

It was the room Myrna Bliss had occupied.  Mother Fregeau had insisted;
Jacques Fregeau had implored.  It was fitting that the best at the Bas
Rhône should be Jean's.  The little back room that had been his for ten
years was quite impossible.  It was different now.  It would be but to
make him ridiculous--what with all these grand strangers that were
around him!  And besides, _merveille du bon Dieu_, was he not now
himself the greatest of the great ones!

In through the window the late afternoon sun played over the faded
wallpaper of the _chambre de luxe_; from without there was the hum of
voices, exclamations of amazement, cries of delight and admiration, the
curious composite sound of a gathered, eager crowd.  And Jean, well
back from the sill that he might not be seen, glanced outside, it was
his--his!  The work that he had done during the past week in the
_atelier_ they had made for him in the barn behind the Bas Rhône!  It
was finished!  Monsieur Bidelot was exhibiting it now to
Bernay-sur-Mer.  The great Academician was standing in the tonneau of
the automobile and holding it up for every one to look at--the
fisherman with his boat and net in clay.  Ah, they understood that, the
people of Bernay-sur-Mer!  But they understood only that it was
magnificent because Bidelot and Monsieur Bliss and the great men who
had come amongst them told them that it was magnificent.

For years he had made the _poupées_, and they had seen nothing--and he
had seen nothing.  But now they knew because they were told; and now he
knew because his soul, his brain was ablaze with the knowledge of
creative power, because what had gone before was nothing, because what
was to come would sweep the past, that little thing that Bidelot in his
emotion cried over, into insignificance.

He drew back, his head high; his outflung arms, hands clenched,
stretched heavenward.  These strangers, these great critics had said
it, and it was so!  The name of Jean Laparde would never die!

He stripped off the long sculptor's apron that covered him from neck to
knees, and held it out at arm's length, gazing first at it and then at
the rough fisherman's clothes that hung, where Mother Fregeau had
placed them, on the end peg on the wall--a little apart, significantly
it seemed, whether by accident or design, from the new clothes that had
come from Marseilles.  And then he laughed out suddenly in a quick,
exalted way, and tossed the apron on the bed.  It was all changed,
that!  He was through with the fisherman's dress, he was through with
Bernay-sur-Mer!  To-night he was to dine with Bidelot and a score of
others in Marseilles, and after that in a few days it would be--Paris.

He undressed hurriedly, and began to dress again in a clean suit--but a
little slowly now, none too deftly.  They were still strange to him
these clothes; but then everything was strange.  The people around him
were strange.  At times he felt awkward, constrained in their
presence--and at times he could laugh down at them as from a superior
height.  Ay, he could laugh--they were at his feet!  Only--he frowned
heavily--he could not laugh at Myrna Bliss.  He was not master there!
And yet she, somehow, did not erect the barrier.  It was himself that
did that--because he could not forget that behind the roguish smile in
the grey eyes might lurk the thought that, after all, he was only a
fisherman.

A fisherman!  They were cheering now outside.  His hands shut tightly.
A fisherman!  He was no longer a fisherman!  He was Jean Laparde, a
sculptor of France, a man before whom lay a path of glory, a man whom
the nation would acclaim, a man of whose future all stood in envy!
They had told him that, these men whom France had already honoured,
these men who had accepted him as more than their equal.  But there was
no need for them to tell him--he knew it in his soul.  None, no man,
the world itself, could hold back now the genius of Jean Laparde!

Paris!  He was pacing the room now, his eyes afire.  To-morrow or the
next day, when the Blisses had made their plans, Paris and fame was
his.  What a life it was that now opened out before him!  A place
amongst the highest, the world to resound with the name of Jean
Laparde--and those grey eyes, that bronze hair, that glorious beauty of
the American--God! he would immortalise her in clay, in bronze, in
marble.

Ay, they might well cheer while the chance was theirs, these people of
Bernay-sur-Mer!  To-morrow or the next day he would be saying good-bye
to them, and--he stood suddenly still--and good-bye, too, to
Marie-Louise.  The thought put a damper upon his spirits; his brows
gathered in deep furrows of impatient perplexity.

He had not seen much of Marie-Louise in the last week--he had seen her
scarcely at all.  Only twice--when she with many others had stood in
the doorway to watch his work.  She had smiled at him then, as though
it were her work, too, as though it were a joint proprietorship--but
she had gone before he could speak to her.  And at the cottage, when he
had been there at the invitation of Myrna or her father, Marie-Louise,
strangely enough, now that he thought of it, was never to be seen.

He would have to speak to her, of course, about going away; but what
chance, with the whirl he had been in, had he had to do it?  She would
know that he was going to Paris, for everybody knew it--but he would
have to speak to her himself about it before he went.  And what was he
to say?  Certainly, he loved Marie-Louise--but the great chance of his
life was before him.  What was he to say to her?  He would go to Paris
for a time, make this great name for himself, and then
afterwards--_what_?

He refused to tolerate the question.  He had refused to tolerate it all
week.  It was enough for the present that he was going for a time to
Paris.  Marie-Louise was sensible enough not to make a scene.  She
could see readily enough that he must go and that she must stay.  How,
for instance, could she associate with women of fashion and society
like Myrna Bliss, who would be the women of the new world that must
necessarily form part of his life hereafter.  What was he thinking of?
Was it the "afterwards" again?  Was he not coming back to Marie-Louise?
Was he choosing now between his art and Marie-Louise?  No; he was
not--he would not!  That was an issue for the future.  It would work
itself out.  Why should he plague himself about it!

He loved Marie-Louise, of course; but it would have been easier now if
there had been nothing between them.  He could not go to Marie-Louise
and say: Marie-Louise, I love you; but it is finished--you can see that
the _grand monde_ would make a very great difference between Jean
Laparde, the great sculptor, and Marie-Louise the fisherwoman of
Bernay-sur-Mer.  No; he could not say that, but--_sacré nom_!--was he
back to the everlasting "afterwards" again, when he refused so
resolutely to go beyond the present?  Was it not enough that he was
simply going to Paris for a time--a matter that would seem natural
enough to her, and of which she would be glad because great things had
come to him?  He would talk to her like that--that would be
enough--Marie-Louise was a sensible girl.  One could not say to her
that it would be better to finish everything, he would never say that
to Marie-Louise--but if, _par example_, he and Marie-Louise had never
talked of the marriage there would be nothing now to trouble him.
And--he swung around sharply as a knock sounded on the door.

"Come!" he called.

Papa Fregeau stuck in his head.

"_Pardon_, Monsieur Jean"--it was "monsieur" now--"it is Mademoiselle
Bliss who is alone in the café below.  Will Monsieur Jean see her for a
moment before he goes out?"

"In an instant," Jean answered quickly.  "Tell mademoiselle that I will
be there in an instant."

Papa Fregeau hesitated, stared about the room, and stared at Jean, his
fat cheeks grotesquely expanded--and his arms rose suddenly in a
gesture of profound helplessness.

"_Mon Dieu_!" he muttered heavily.  "Is it possible that it is our
little Jean there--ah, _pardon_"--he stammered--"_Monsieur_ Jean"--and
made a hasty exit from the room, as though utterly confounded at his
own temerity.

But Jean, following his reply, had paid no further attention to Papa
Fregeau.  He had learned to knot the long, flowing tie that Myrna had
chosen as part of his dress, for she had said, had she not, that it was
the tie the artists wore in Paris?  He knotted it now with extra care,
put on his coat, snatched up his hat, and ran downstairs to the café
below.

She was waiting for him back by the little _comptoir_ where he had
stood that evening when she had first spoken to him.  She had been like
a glorious vision that had burst suddenly upon him that evening--she
was a thousand times more glorious now, for her smile was eager with an
intimacy that promised--what did it promise?  He did not know.  It was
there--and her eyes were shining, and the white throat was divinely
beautiful--and the thrill of her presence quickened the beat of his
heart.

Her laugh rang through the room, silver-toned.

"Jean," she cried merrily, "you are harder to see these days than a
prime minister!  What do you mean, sir?  Have you deserted us?"

"_Ma foi_!" protested Jean, a little anxiously.  "Mademoiselle does not
mean that!  Was I not at lunch with her to-day, and yesterday, and the
day before that?"

"Yes, and all day at the work, and every evening in Marseilles"--she
manufactured a dainty pout through her smile.  "And even now that I
have snatched a little moment, I must not keep you for they are waiting
for you outside."

"Let them wait!" said Jean tensely.

"Oh, no; we mustn't do that," she said laughingly, shaking her head.
"So listen, Jean.  I have come to tell you that--can you guess what?
That you are not going to Paris with us after all."

"Not going to Paris!"--Jean gazed at her bewilderedly, as he repeated
the words.

"With _us_--silly boy!" she smiled teasingly.  "Are you disappointed?"

She teased, and mocked, and delighted him, and fired his blood by
amazing and elusive turns.  He could not cope with her yet.

"But mademoiselle knows," he blundered.  "I--I do not understand.  It
is a great disappointment."

"Then it mustn't be!" she declared brightly.  "For it is my idea, and
if you are not pleased with it, it is I who will be terribly
disappointed.  It is just a little while ago that father and I arranged
the plans.  We are to go to-morrow direct to Paris, and as soon as we
get there--now listen very attentively, Jean!--we are going to pick out
an _atelier_ for you and fit it up.  And you are not to come until we
send you word that everything is ready.  And the day you arrive I shall
be hostess at the studio at a reception to which all Paris will be
invited.  Everybody that is worth while will come, and your entrée will
be a triumph.  Now, Jean, will that not be splendid?"

She was smiling at him, vivacious, flushed with excitement.
Splendid--yes, it would be splendid!  An entrée to Paris like that!  It
was the first tangible glimpse of reality out of the chaotic blaze of
luring, golden dreams.

"It--it is too good of mademoiselle!" he stammered excitedly.

Low, musical, her laugh rippled through the room again, as she looked
at him.  The man was magnificent--the head, the shoulders, the splendid
strength, the mobile, changing lights and shadows in his face like a
child who had not yet learned to mask its emotions, and all this
coupled with the deliciously picturesque background of the discovery of
his art, would make him the rage in Paris.  Paris would literally go
wild over him!  And she?  Well, he would be still more a new sensation
than ever--and perhaps, who knew?--but the man was too easily
aroused--and then there was the possibility that her father, that
Bidelot and the others had overrated him, that he would be but the
phenomenon of the moment, only to sink after a while into uninteresting
mediocrity--she would see.  But for the present at least Paris would
echo and re-echo with the name of Jean Laparde.  Her eyebrows arched
demurely, innocently.  There was something else she had to say to Jean.
She had never spoken to him of Marie-Louise--naturally.  But she must
speak now.  Marie-Louise, a peasant girl, a bare-footed fisherwoman, in
Paris as Jean's fiancée was perfectly impossible!

"Jean," she said ingenuously, "you know we took the cottage without
much formality as far as any definite length of time was concerned.  Of
course we expected to stay longer, and if all this had not happened we
certainly should have done so.  So, do you think, when we speak to
Marie-Louise about going, that she would be perfectly satisfied with a
month's rent?  I told father I would ask you."

Jean's face clouded.

"You have not told Marie-Louise then that you are going to-morrow?" he
asked slowly.

"How could we--when we did not know ourselves until a little while
ago?" she answered.

"No; that is so," he said.  Then, with a short, conscious laugh: "I
have not spoken to Marie-Louise myself."

"Of course you haven't!" she returned quickly, "And you have been wise."

"Wise?"--Jean looked at her, puzzled.

"Marie-Louise is not blind," said Myrna quietly.  "It is far better
that she should have seen things for herself--and she could not help
seeing them during the last week."

"You mean?" Jean began--and stopped.

"You know what I mean, Jean," she said gravely.  "That she must have
seen what everybody else sees--what you see yourself.  That if she ever
had any idea of going to Paris with you, it is quite out of the
question.  It is different now--everything is changed.  You are not a
fisherman any longer; you have a great place to take in the world that
she cannot take beside you.  A week in Paris and, even if neither of
you see it now, you would both see it only too bitterly and clearly
then.  For both your sakes it is better settled now."

Jean was staring across the room to where, outside, the crowd was
packed densely in the road.  Had he not thought of just those things
that she had been saying?  Had he not thought of them all week?  They
were true; but still there was Marie-Louise who--what was that?  They
were cheering him there outside--it made his blood tingle, he felt the
mad elation of it, his soul seemed to leap out to meet the acclaim!

"But that is not all, Jean"--she was speaking again.  "There is another
thing, something you owe to--oh, how shall I say it?--to your country,
and--"  She stopped suddenly and caught his arm.  "Listen!" she
breathed.  "Listen!"

It was Bidelot, the great Academician, his voice raised in impassioned
words.  Through the window they could see him standing, bare-headed, in
the automobile.

"... Bernay-sur-Mer will evermore live in the hearts of Frenchmen--you
have given to France the immortal name of Jean Laparde."

Her hands, both of them now, were clasped tightly on his arm.

"Jean!" she whispered.  "Jean!"

"_Mon Dieu_!"--the words came hoarsely from Jean's throat.  They were
cheering again.  He moved, like iron impelled to the magnet, across the
room.  He looked at Myrna.  He had never seen her eyes so bright.

"It is only the beginning, Jean"--she seemed half hysterical herself.
"But in Paris, Jean--in Paris you shall see!"

They were at the door, and suddenly she flung it wide open.  There was
a roar of voices.  She was smiling at him from the doorway.  They were
shouting his name.  They rushed at him, and, lifting him shoulder high,
carried him to the automobile.  Fame--was this only a taste of it?  No
more than that?  In Paris--what was it he should see in Paris?  They
were shouting again.  It was like some fiery draught that his soul was
drinking in.  He craved it with a lust that was passionate,
all-possessing.  He cried out to those around him.  He did not know
what he said.  And then Bidelot was speaking to him, and the automobile
was whirling down the road, followed by the shouts of all
Bernay-sur-Mer.

All Bernay-sur-Mer?  No; not all.  For as the car flashed by, halfway
between the little bridge and the eastern headland, the fringe of
bushes by the roadside parted, a dark head lifted, and Marie-Louise
gazed after it.  It was all so strange, and she could not quite
understand.  Once, twice before, on other evenings, she had watched the
car pass.  They were all of the great world those men with Jean in the
car; of the great world of which she knew nothing, only that the
village spoke of the strangers with awe.  And now Jean was one of
them--and they seemed so proud of him, so proud to make him one of
themselves, these great men.  And she was proud of him, too, oh, so
proud and glad and happy--only back of it all was a little chill of
dread and fear, and she could not quite understand.  She had smiled at
Jean from the edge of the crowd that was clustered around the door of
the barn those days when he had been working at the clay--and then she
had stolen away and cried so bitterly.  She did not know why she had
done that.  If only some one would tell her what it all meant!  Was it
because Jean was going away for a little time?  The dark eyes widened
slowly.  Was it only for a little time?  She had not talked to Jean
since that morning on the beach, and that was so long, long ago.  It
wasn't Jean's fault, though, nearly so much as hers.  She had really
tried to evade him.  No, not to evade Jean; but to evade the others out
of the shyness and diffidence for the great strangers who were now
constantly around him.  Would there be always these strangers around
him?

She drew herself up suddenly, her small hands fiercely clenched.  She
hated these strangers!  That was it!  They were always coming between
Jean and herself!  They were always there!  They made of Jean a
different man; they made him one of themselves, and in doing that they
were snatching him away from her, taking him across what seemed like
some vast gulf that she could not traverse herself.  She hated this
Monsieur American, and this mademoiselle; and she hated the day they
had come, for it had all begun that day.  The red burned angrily in her
cheeks, the lithe form quivered in a quick rush of passion--and then,
instantly penitent, with a little sob, she flung herself down upon the
grass.

No; she did not hate them!  What had she said!  The _bon Dieu_ would be
very angry with her for that.  And they had been very kind and good to
her, this monsieur and this mademoiselle.  And to hate all the others
was to commit a sin, for were they not there because Jean--she raised
her head quickly, parting the bushes again, as she caught the sound of
steps and voices from the road.

It was Monsieur Bliss speaking in French to Father Anton, who walked
between Monsieur Bliss and mademoiselle.

"Why should he not work here?  Why should he go to Paris?  What a
question, my dear Monsieur le Curé!  It is because here is nothing;
because in Paris there is everything.  It is there that he will study
the great works of famous sculptors; it is there that he will have
models and facilities for his work; it is there that he will have
inspiration from the art around him; it is there that, with his genius,
he will sift and choose, profiting from the different schools even as
he creates a new one for himself; and it is there that the leading men
of France will unite with the social world to make the name of Jean
Laparde known and honoured wherever art is known."

"But," said Father Anton anxiously, "but he will come back--to
Marie-Louise."

Henry Bliss's hand fell sympathetically upon the old priest's shoulder,
as he shook his head.

"I do not know," he said soberly.  "Who can tell?  It depends upon
Jean--and Marie-Louise.  Frankly, I do not think he will come back, for
there is always the danger that the greater he becomes the greater will
become the distance between them--and Jean will unquestionably become a
national figure.  But it is a vastly different thing with him than it
is with her.  It is innate in him to take that place gracefully, even
as his genius is innate in him.  To her, I am afraid, it would be an
impossible and an impracticable life.  It is likely she would be
miserable to begin with and feel herself a drag upon him, for, we must
admit, she could not, as we say in America, hold up her end in his new
life.  It is one of those tragedies of life, isn't it, that we cannot
shape one way or the other?  It is something they alone must work out.
It is not a little matter, this future of Jean's.  France has claimed
Jean, Monsieur le Curé, and it may well be, as Myrna here said a moment
ago, there is no place in his new life for Marie-Louise.  I--"

They had passed on.

It seemed to Marie-Louise that she was very cold, that somehow she
could not move.  There were three figures out there on the road walking
along.  It was very strange that so ordinary a thing as that should be
taking place.  She seemed to be numbed, to be waiting somehow for a
return to consciousness.  Was that consciousness that was returning
now, was that it--this dull, monotonous pain?  And that great choking
in her heart--what was that?  She was standing erect, and words were
quivering on her lips.

"There is no place in his new life for Marie-Louise."

She was staring out before her; but the road, and, beyond it, the white
beach, and, beyond that again, the blue of the sea with the great
golden shaft of light from the setting sun upon it was gone--and there
was only nothingness.  Only her lips moved.

"There is no place--in his new life--for Marie-Louise."




-- X --

A DAUGHTER OF FRANCE

How still the house was!  Only once during the night had Marie-Louise
heard a sound as she had sat, dressed, by the window in the little
attic room.  And that sound had been the whir of an automobile rushing
by on the road--it had been Jean returning from Marseilles.  That was
while it was very dark, very long ago--now it was daylight again, and
the sun was streaming into the room.

The chaste, sweet face was tired and weary and aged a little; but on
the lips, sensitive, delicate, making even more beautiful their
contour, was a brave, resolute little smile, as her eyes rested on the
small white bed, neatly made, unslept in.  It was over now, the fight
that had been so hard and so cruel to fight; and she needed only the
courage to go on to the end.

Over and over again, all through the night, she had thought it out.
She loved Jean.  She loved Jean so much!  She had trembled once when
she had tried to think how much, and the thought had come so quickly,
before she could arrest it, that she loved Jean as much as she loved
God--and then she had prayed the _bon Dieu_ not to be angry with her
for the sin, for she had not meant to think such thoughts as that.

It was true what they had said when they had passed by on the road
yesterday evening.  There was no place in his new life for her.  A
hundred little things all through the week had shown her that, only,
until yesterday evening when Monsieur Bliss had spoken, she had not
understood what they meant--Nanette, that first day, when Jean had come
to lunch with mademoiselle and monsieur; the curious, side-long glances
that the villagers gave her now; a strange, embarrassed reserve in
Father Anton, when the good curé had spoken to her lately; that wide,
vast gulf that lay between the world mademoiselle lived in, the world
that Jean was going to, and her own world.  They had all seen
it--except herself.  And she had not understood because she had not
allowed herself to think what it might mean, what she knew now it
meant--that she must lose Jean.

To let Jean go out of her life because France had claimed him--that was
what her soul had whispered to her all through the night.  A Daughter
of France, her Uncle Gaston had called her proudly--it was Jean who had
told her what her uncle had said--that he had taught her to love God
and be never afraid.  But she was afraid now, she had been afraid all
through the night, for it seemed as if there were no more happiness, as
though a great pain that would never go away again had come to her.

France had claimed Jean.  He was to be a famous man.  Did they not all
talk of his glorious future?  It was different with Jean--years ago
even she had known that.  She herself had told him he was different
from the fishermen of Bernay-sur-Mer.  Jean was born to the life that
he was going to.  Was he not even now taking his place amongst these
great strangers as though he had been accustomed to do so always?  And
she, if she should try to do it, they would laugh at her, and she would
bring ridicule upon Jean, and she could not do what Jean could do.  She
was a peasant girl whom mademoiselle scolded about going without shoes
and stockings.

And Jean must surely have seen these things, too.  But Jean, though he
had heedlessly hurt her so when he had given away again the little
beacon, would never speak to her of this, because this was a much
greater thing which was to change all their lives.  It was she who must
speak to Jean, it was she who must tell him that she understood that
the great future which lay before him must not be harmed; that she must
not hold him back; that she must not stand in his way; that she would
only hurt him in that dazzling, bewildering world that would disdain a
fishergirl; that it was France, not she, who came first.

The night had brought her that.  It was only the courage she needed now
to act upon it.

She stood up, looking through the window--and the great dark eyes
filled with a blinding mist.

"Jean!  Jean!" she said brokenly aloud.

A little while she stood there, and then walked slowly across the room
to the bed.  And as once she had knelt there before, she dropped again
upon her knees beside it.  And now the smile came bravely again.  They
were wrong.  It was not true.  There was a place in his life for
her--something that she could do now.  There was one way in which her
love could still help Jean in the wonderful life that had come to him.

The dark head bent to the coverlet.

"_Mon Père_," she whispered, "make me that--Jean's beacon now."

And after a time she rose, and bathed her face, and fastened the black
coils of hair that had become unloosed, and, as she heard Nanette
stirring below, went quietly downstairs.

She must see Jean.  They were going away to-day, mademoiselle and
monsieur, and Nanette and Jules; and Jean was to follow them in a few
days.  She had heard mademoiselle and her father discussing it at their
supper last evening.  She must see Jean now before the others went,
so--so that everybody would understand.

She stole out of the house, gained the road and started to run along it
toward the village.  Jean would be up long ago, all his life he had
risen hours before this, and she would be back by the time mademoiselle
and monsieur were up and needed her.  She stopped suddenly, and in
quick dismay glanced down at her bare feet.  She had forgotten to put
on her shoes and stockings.  Suppose mademoiselle should see her
returning like that!

And then Marie-Louise shook her head slowly, and went on again.  It was
not right to disobey, but it could not matter very much now, for
mademoiselle was going away in the afternoon.  And besides she could
run much faster without them, and--the tears came with a rush to her
eyes--they seemed all at once to mean so much, those shoes and
stockings.  It--it was the shoes and stockings and all they meant that
was taking her out of Jean's life.  She understood it all so well now.

She brushed the tears a little angrily from her eyes.  She must not do
that.  To go to Jean and cry!  Far better not to go at all!
Afterwards, when they were gone, these Americans, and when Jean was
gone, and she was alone and only the _bon Dieu_ to see, then perhaps
the tears would be too strong for her.  But now she must talk very
bravely to Jean, and not make it harder for him; for, no matter what
happened or what was to come, Jean, too, in his love, would feel the
parting.

She understood Jean better now, too.  The night had made so many things
much clearer.  Had he not confessed that he was not always happy as a
fisherman in Bernay-sur-Mer?  And must it not have been just this, this
greatness within him, that had made him discontented?  And now that it
had come true, a far greater thing than he could have dreamed of,
changing his whole life, must it not for the time have made him forget
everything else?  It had not killed his love for her, it had not done
that--but this thing must be first before either of their loves.
Afterwards, perhaps, it might kill his love--afterwards, yes,
afterwards it might do that.  She tried to smile a little.  It was what
she was going now to bring about--afterwards it _must_ kill his love.
It was the only way.  And that would come surely, very surely--his
giving away of the beacon, so lightly forgetting what he told her it
had meant, taught her that.  If he went now, if she bade him go now, it
was not for a little time--it was for always.

She was running, very fast, breathlessly--as though she were trying to
outrun her thoughts.  It was coming again, the same bitter fight that
she had fought out through the darkness, through all those long hours
alone--but she must not let it come, that sadness, that yearning that
tried to make her falter and hold back.  The way was very plain.  If
she loved Jean, if she really loved him, she must not let that love do
anything but what would help him in his new, great life--she must cling
to that.  It would not be love if she did anything else; it would only
mean that she loved herself more than she loved Jean.

"To be never afraid"--Uncle Gaston had taught her that, and the words
were on her lips now--"To be never afraid."

She was walking again now, for she had reached the village.  Some one
called to her from a cottage door, and she called back cheerfully as
she passed on to the Bas Rhône, where Papa Fregeau was standing in the
doorway.

"_Tiens, petite_!" the fat little proprietor cried heartily.  "But it
is good to see our little Marie-Louise!  You do not come often these
days.  They make you work too hard, those Americans, perhaps?  But
to-day they are going--eh?  Wait, I will call Lucille."

"Good morning, Jacques," she answered.  "Yes; it is to-day that they
are going, so do not call Mother Fregeau, for there is a great deal to
do at the house and I must hurry back."

"Ah!" observed Papa Fregeau.  "You have come then with a message?"

"Yes," she said hurriedly; "for Jean.  Do you know where he is?"

"But, _là, là_!" chuckled Papa Fregeau.  "But, yes; he is upstairs in
his room.  But wait--I must tell you.  I have just helped him carry it
up.  It is a very grand American affair, and he is like a child with
it.  It arrived from Marseilles last night after he had gone."

"What did?" inquired Marie-Louise patiently.

"What did!" ejaculated Papa Fregeau.  "But did I not tell you?  The
American trunk, _pardieu_! that he is to go away with, and--"  The fat
little man grew suddenly confused.  "_Tiens_!" he stammered.  "He is
upstairs in his room, Marie-Louise.  I am an old fool--eh--an old
fool!"--and he waddled away.

Why should it have hurt a little more because Jacques Fregeau had said
Jean was going away?  And why should Jacques Fregeau have been able to
read it in her eyes?  She was not so brave perhaps as she had thought.
And her heart was pounding now very quickly and so hard that it brought
pain, as she went up the stairs.

"_Mon Père_"--her lips were whispering the same prayer over
again--"make me that--Jean's beacon now."

And then she was knocking at the door.

For an instant she hesitated, as his voice called to her to enter; then
she opened the door and stepped inside.  It was Jean, this great fine
figure of a man, who turned so quickly toward her; but it was already
the Jean of the world where they wore shoes and stockings, and his
clothes were like the clothes of Monsieur Bliss.  They made him very
handsome, very grand; only somehow they made it seem that her errand
was useless now, that she had come too late, that Jean was already gone.

Her eyes met his, smiled--and, from his face, strayed about the room.
It was very fine that American trunk, but not very large.  It was like
one that mademoiselle had, that she called a steamer trunk, and carried
on the automobile--and the trunk was empty, and the tray was on the
floor beside it.

"Marie-Louise!" he cried--and then, a little awkwardly, he caught her
hands.  "But--but what has brought you here, Marie-Louise?"

"To see you, Jean," she told him simply.

For a moment he stared at her uneasily.  Was this then to be the scene
that he had dreaded, that he had been putting off?  And then he laughed
a little unnaturally.

"Ah, did you think, then, Marie-Louise, that I had forgotten you?  You
must not think that!  Only, _mon Dieu_, what with Bidelot, and the
critics, and Marseilles, and the work all day at the new design, what
could I do?  But Bidelot and the rest have returned to Paris, and
mademoiselle and monsieur go to-day; and this afternoon I was going to
find you and tell you about the great plans they have all made for me."

"Yes; I know, Jean," she answered.  "And that is what I have come
for--to have a little talk about you and me."

"About my going away, you mean?" he said, infusing a lightness into his
voice.  "But you must not feel sad about that, Marie-Louise.  You would
not have me lose a chance like that!  And it is only for a little
while, until I have learned what, they say, Paris will teach me.  I
shall do great things in Paris, Marie-Louise--and then I shall come
back."

She shook her head slowly.

"Jean," she said very quietly, "it is about your coming back that I
want to speak to you.  I have thought it all out last night.  It is not
for a little while.  When you go it is for always.  You can never come
back."

"Never come back!  Ah, is it that then that is troubling you?" he said
eagerly.  "You mean that you would not mind my going for a little
while, only you think it is for more than that?"

"You do not understand, Jean"--it seemed as though she must cry out in
wild abandon, as though the tears must come and fill her eyes, as
though she were not brave at all.  Would not the _bon Dieu_ help her
now!  She drew her hands away from him, and turned from him for an
instant.  "You can never come back, Jean; you can never come back to
the old life.  You will go on and on, further and further away from it,
making a great name for yourself, and your friends will be all like the
_grand monde_ who have been here, and I know that I cannot go into that
life, too--I understand that all so well.  And--and so, Jean, I have
come to tell you that you are free."

"Free!" he cried--and gazed at her in stupefaction.  The colour came
and went from his face.  He had not thought of this from her!  And yet
it was what he had said in his soul--if only there were nothing between
Marie-Louise and himself!  It was as if a weight had been lifted from
him--only replacing the weight was a miserable pricking of conscience.
"Free!  What are you saying?"

And now the dark eyes were bright and deep and unfaltering--and
suddenly she drew her form erect, and her head was thrown proudly back.

"Free, Jean, because you must not think any more of me; because you are
to be a great man in your country and it is your duty to go, for France
has called you, and France is first; because"--her voice, quivering,
yet triumphant, was ringing through the room--"because I give you to
France, Jean!  You do not belong to me now--you belong to France!"

For a moment he did not speak.  There seemed a thousand emotions,
soul-born, surging upon him.  Her words thrilled him; it was over;
there was relief; it was done.  She had gone where he had not dared to
go in his thoughts--to the end.  He would never come back, she said.
He was free.  But he could not have her think that he could let her go
like that!

"No, no, Marie-Louise!" he burst out.  "Do you think that even if I
belonged to France, even if all my life were changed, that I could ever
forget you, that I could forget Bernay-sur-Mer, and all the people and
my life here?"

"Yes," she said, "you will forget."

"Never!" he asserted fiercely.

"Jean"--her voice was low again--"it is the _bon Dieu_ last night who
has made me understand.  I do not know what is in the new world that
you are going to, only that you will be one of the greatest and perhaps
one of the richest men in France.  And I understand you better, Jean, I
think, than you understand yourself.  This fame and power will mean
more to you than anything else, and it will grow and grow and grow,
Jean.  And, oh, Jean, I am afraid you will forget that it is not you at
all who does these great things but that it is the _bon Dieu_ who lets
you do them, and that you will grow proud, Jean, and lose all the best
out of your life because you will even forget that once those clothes
hanging there"--she pointed toward the rough fisherman's suit--"were
yours."

It was strange to hear Marie-Louise talking so!  He did not entirely
understand.  Something was bewildering him.  She was telling him that
he must think no more of her, that it was finished.  And there was no
scene.  And she did not reproach him.  And there were no tears.  And it
did not seem as though it were quite real.  He had pictured quite
another kind of scene, where there would be passion and angry words.
And there was nothing of that--only Marie-Louise, like a grown-up
Marie-Louise, like a mother almost, speaking so gravely and anxiously
to him of things one would not expect Marie-Louise to know anything
about.

She turned from him impulsively; and from the peg took down the cap and
the rough suit, and from the floor gathered up the heavy boots with the
coarse socks tucked into their tops--and, as he watched her in
amazement, she thrust them suddenly into his arms.

"Promise me, Jean," she said in the same low way, "that you will keep
these with you always, and that sometimes in your great world you will
look at them and remember--that they, too, belong to France"--and then
suddenly her voice broke, and she had run from the room.

She was gone.  Jean's eyes, from the doorway, shifted to the clothes
that cluttered up his arms--and for a long time he did not move.  Then
one hand lifted slowly, and in a dazed sort of way brushed the hair
back from his eyes.  It was a strange thing, that--to take these things
with him to remember--what was it she had said?--to remember that they,
too, belonged to France.

"_Mon Dieu_!" he whispered--and, with a queer lift of his shoulders,
turned mechanically to the trunk beside him.  "_Mon Dieu_!" he
whispered again--and now there was a twisted little smile of pain upon
his lips as understanding came, and almost reverently he laid the
things in the bottom of the trunk.




-- XI --

THE PENDULUM

How many miles had they come?  Jean did not know.  It had been far--but
far along a road of golden dreams, where time and distance mattered
only because they were so quickly passed.

It was Myrna Bliss who had suggested it because, had she not said? she
wanted to have a little talk with him alone before she left for Paris
that afternoon--and they would walk out along the road before her
father started, and the automobile would pick her up on the way.

And so they had come, and so she had talked and he had
listened--feasting his eyes upon the superb, alluring figure that
swung, so splendidly supreme, along beside him.  She had told him of
Paris--Paris, the City Beautiful--of the great city that was the glory
of France, of its magnificent boulevards, its statues, its arches, its
wonderful architecture, its wealth of art garnered from the ages, its
happy mirth, its gaiety, its richness and its life, the life that would
now be his.  And he had listened, rapt, absorbed, fascinated, as though
to some entrancing melody, now martial, now in softer strain, that
stirred his pulse as it carried him beyond himself, and unfettered his
imagination until it swept, free as a bird in air, into the land of
dreams, that knew a fierce, ecstatic echo in his soul--the melody of
her voice.

But now there had come a jarring note into that melody; and a sudden,
swift emotion, that mingled dismay, a passionate longing, a panic sense
of impotency, was upon him.  The quick throb of the motor was sounding
from down the road behind them.  Monsieur Bliss was coming now.  In a
moment she would be gone.

She had heard it, too, for she ceased speaking abruptly, and, halting,
turned to face him.

"Isn't it too bad, Jean?" she cried disappointedly.  "And I had hardly
begun to tell you about it!  But then, never mind, the rest of it all
you will see for yourself in a few more days, when you get to Paris."

In a moment she would be gone!  What was it that held him back--that
had always held him back before?  He was strong enough--strong enough
to crush her to him, to cover that gloriously beautiful face with his
kisses, to bathe his face in the fragrance of her hair, to feel her
heart, the throb, the pulse, the life of her body against his own!
What was it that, strong as he was, was stronger than he?

"It--it is good-bye," he said, in a low, tense way.

She felt the passion that was possessing him--he read it in the
startled glance of the grey eyes before they were veiled; in the ivory
of the perfect throat grown colourful with the mounting red; in the
parted lips before the teasing, merry smile was forced there, as she
stepped back a little away from him.  She knew!  She knew, as he knew,
that his soul was aflame--and it was she, not he, who dammed back the
tide of his passion with that "something" that was so powerful an ally
of hers, so readily, so always at her instant command.  She knew, as he
knew, that his soul was aflame--and yet she had not repulsed him.  What
did it mean?  That she _cared_!  But why did she laugh so lightly now,
why was she so perfectly self-possessed?  What did it mean?  That she
was playing with him!

"How absurd, Jean!" she laughed gaily.  "Of course, it isn't
'good-bye'; that is"--she glanced at him demurely--"that is, unless
you've changed your mind about coming to Paris."  Then, impulsively
eager: "But you haven't done that, have you?  And you want to come more
than ever now after what I have told you, don't you?  And, Jean"--she
came suddenly close to him again, and her face, its demureness gone,
was puckered up in very earnest little wrinkles--"there isn't anything,
you won't let anything keep you from coming--will you?"

Keep him from Paris--from her!  Why had she asked that?  He laughed out
boisterously, harshly.  It was very near now, that accursed automobile!
Monsieur Bliss was calling out to them.  Keep him from--Paris!  He
could only laugh out again wildly, as he looked at her.

"Jean!"--it was a quick, hurried exclamation, not all composure now,
and her eyes were hidden, and her face was turned away.  "Jean, good
gracious, don't you hear father calling to you?  Look, here he is!"

Jean swept his hand across his eyes.  It was the madness upon him.
Yes, here was Monsieur Bliss beside him, and she and her father were
both talking at once.  It was Paris!  Always Paris that they talked of!
In a week, in ten days, he would be there.  And then they had both
shaken hands with him, the grey eyes had smiled into his for an
instant, and she had sprung from him into the automobile.  It was a
daze.  They had gone.  He was standing in the road watching them.  She
was fluttering a scarf at him, as she leaned far over the back of the
car--her voice, full-throated, was throbbing in his ears.

"_An revoir_, Jean!  _Au revoir_--till Paris!"

The car disappeared over the brow of a little hill, came into sight
again as it topped the opposite rise, became a blur and then a tiny
dot, scarcely discernible, far on along the road.  And still he stood
there.

It was gone at last.  He turned then, and started back along the road
toward Bernay-sur-Mer; now walking slowly, now suddenly changing his
pace to a quick, impulsive stride.  His eyes were on the road before
him, but he saw nothing.  Her voice was ringing in his ears again, and
again he was living in that golden land of dreams--with her.

Paris!  The City Beautiful!  Paris--where he should know fame and
power, where his genius should kindle a flame of enthusiasm that would
spread throughout all France!  Paris--where men should do him honour!
Paris--where riches were!  Paris--where she was!

His brain reeled with it.  It was not wild imagining.  A power, a
mighty power, the power that made him master of his art lived and
breathed in every fibre of his being.  He needed no tongue of others
now to tell him that this power was his; the knowledge of it was in his
soul until he knew, knew as he knew that he had being and existence,
that the work of Jean Laparde would stand magnificent and supreme
before the eyes of the world.  He saw himself the centre, the leader of
a glittering entourage.  Fame!  Men of the highest ranks should envy
him--the gamins of Paris should know his name.  He threw back his head
on his great shoulders.  Conceit, all this?  No; it was stupendous--but
it was not conceit.  He knew--his soul knew it.  He was more sure of
himself now than even those great critics of France had been sure.
They had seen nothing--he had not begun.  A year, two years in Paris,
the tools to work with, the models of flesh and blood at his
command--and, ah, God, what would he not do!  They should see, they
should see then!  And they should stand and wonder, as they had not
wondered before--at Jean Laparde!

He laughed suddenly aloud.  Father Anton had preached a sermon once in
the little church, he remembered it now--that fame was an empty thing.
An empty thing!  He laughed again.  It was the simplicity of the good
curé, who believed such things because, _pardieu_! the curé was a
gentle soul and knew no better.  What should Father Anton, who never
went anywhere, into whose life came nothing but the little daily
affairs of the fisherfolk in Bernay-sur-Mer, who could never have had
any experience in the things outside the life of the village that
turned everlastingly like a wheel in its grooves, know of fame?  It was
not the fault of Father Anton that he talked so, for he got those
things out of his books, and, having no reason out of his own knowledge
of life to know any better, believed them!

Jean shrugged his shoulders.  One felt sorry for Father Anton!  Perhaps
once in two years the curé journeyed as far as Marseilles--and the few
miles was a great event!  What could one expect Father Anton to
discover for himself out of life?

Fame--an empty thing!  Poor Father Anton, who, because he believed it,
so earnestly preached it to Papa Fregeau and Pierre Lachance who never
went even as far as Marseilles, and who therefore in turn were very
content to believe it, too!  An empty thing?  It was _everything_!

He drew in his breath sharply; his hand was feverishly tossing back the
hair from his forehead.  It was everything!  It was wealth, it was
power, it was might, it was greatness.  It was real; it brought things
to the very senses one possessed, things that one could see and hear
and touch and taste and smell.  They were real--real, those things!  It
brought money that bought all things; it brought position, honour and
command, a name amongst the great names of France; it thrilled the soul
and fired the blood; it was limitless, boundless, without horizon.  It
brought all things beyond the dreams that one could dream, the plaudits
of his fellow-men, the wild-flung shouts of acclamation from
hoarse-throated multitudes; it brought riches; it brought affluence;
and it brought--love.

Love!  Ay, it would bring love!  It would bring him that more than it
would bring him any other thing.  He knew now what had held him back
from crushing that maddeningly alluring form in his arms, from giving
free rein to the passion that was his, from giving him the mastery of
her.  It was that same thing that Marie-Louise sensed between herself
and what she called the _grand monde_.  He, too, had not yet bridged
the gulf.  He had not yet been able to look into those grey eyes of the
beautiful American and forget, deep in his soul, that she was
different, that he had been Jean Laparde the poor fisherman and not
always Jean Laparde the great sculptor.  Was she playing with him?
What did it matter?  The day would come when she would not _play_!  She
would be his--and this fame, that was so empty a thing, would give her
to him.  If for no other thing than that he would go to Paris.  She
would be his--as all the world would be his!  His!  That is what fame
would bring him!  Would she play with him then in his greatness!

Paris!  Paris!  It lay before him, a glittering, entrancing vista; it
held out its arms to him, and beckoned him; it heaped honour and glory
and riches upon him; it gave him---her!

His hands were clenched at his sides, and the skin over the knuckles,
tight-drawn, showed white; his stride was rapid, fierce; he was
breathing quickly; his face was flushed; his eyes were burning.  Paris,
his art that would bring him fame, the fame that would bring him
her--nor heaven nor hell would hold him back!

And then suddenly in the middle of the road he stopped, and his hand
tore at his collar as though it choked him.  Subconsciously he had seen
stretching out before him the sparkling blue of the quiet sea, the
headland, the little strip of beach where he and Gaston used to keep
the boats, a blur of white where the house on the bluff showed through
the trees--he had come that far on his way back.  Subconsciously, in a
meaningless way, he had seen this; but now it was blotted from him in a
flash, and in its place came a scene that, though imaginary, was vivid,
real, actual, where before reality itself had meant nothing.

It was black, intensely black, and the wild howling of the wind was in
his ears.  The rain was lashing at his face, and all along the beach
echoed the terrific boom and roar of the surf.  And now there came the
crash of thunder, and quick upon its heels the heavens opening in
darting, zigzag tongue-flames, lurid, magnificent, awesome, as the
lightning flashes leapt across the sky.  And he was standing on that
little strip of beach, and far out across the waters, shrouded in a
white smother of spume and spray, the figure of Marie-Louise stood
outlined on the edge of the Perigeau Reef.  And now he was crossing
that stretch between them, and living again the physical agony that had
been his; and now he was in the water, clinging to the gunwale of the
boat, and in all the wild abandon of the storm her lips and his were
pressed together in that long kiss that seemed to span all life and all
eternity.

As though spellbound, a whiteness creeping into his face, Jean stood
tense and motionless there in the road.  Why had this come now--he had
never let it come in the week that was past.  Why should it have come
now, like floodgates opened against his will, to overwhelm him?  Ah,
was it that?  That little figure, that was just discernible, far off on
that beach, the little figure, bare-footed, that was sitting now on the
stem of his boat where it was drawn up on the sand, and whose face was
cupped in her hands, and who seemed to be staring so intently out
toward the Perigeau Reef!  That was Marie-Louise there--Marie-Louise.
Was it the sight of her that had brought this thing upon him?  And now
the scene was changed again.  And it was against the window panes that
the rain lashed, and against the sashes that the wind tore, and the
lamp threw its light on the grey-grim face of old Gaston Bernier on the
bed.

Jean shivered a little.  What was coming now?  What was that?  Gaston's
hand was upon his.  He could hear Gaston's voice: "Jean, do you love
Marie-Louise?"  And then Gaston was repeating the question, and
repeating it again: "Jean, do you love Marie-Louise?"  And the old
rugged strength seemed back again in Gaston Bernier, as he, rose up in
bed, and his voice in a strange, stern note rang through the room:
"Swear it, Jean ... to a dying man and in God's presence ... swear that
you will..."

"God!  My God!" Jean cried out aloud--and like a blind man feeling
before him, turned from the road, stumbled a little way through the
fields, and flung himself face down upon the grass.

There was torment and dismay upon him.  His mind was in riot; his soul
bare and naked now before him.  Paris!  No; he must go instead to
Marie-Louise and tell her that he would stay in Bernay-sur-Mer, that
they would live their lives together, because they loved each other.
Yes; he loved Marie-Louise, not with the mad passion he had for this
American who bewitched him, but as he had loved her all the years since
they were children.  He had told Gaston that, and it was true.  It was
the act of a _misérable_ to go away!  No; he would not go now.  It was
true, all that he had told Marie-Louise, that she should stand on the
beach and hold out her arms to him in welcome when he pulled ashore
from the fishing, and that they would be always happy together.  And
yet--and yet had not Marie-Louise herself said that he belonged to
France, and said herself that he must go for the great career that lay
before him, for the great work that he was to do?

He cried out aloud sharply, as though in hurt--and prone upon his face,
his hands outstretched before him, lay still for a little time.

It seemed to come insidiously, calling to him, luring him, wrestling,
fighting, battling with the soul of him--Paris!  Here there was love,
but there, too, was love.  One was calm; the other like the wild tumult
of the storm that in its might, primal, elemental, swept him blindly
forward.  Paris--she would be there, she who held him in a spell, who
made him forget Marie-Louise.  And there was fame and glory there,
honour and wealth--all, all, everything that the world could give.  And
it was his, all his--he had only to reach out and take it.  There, all
France would be at his feet.  It made his brain swim with the mad
intoxication of it.  It was as a man dying with thirst who sees afar
the water that is life to him.  Here, he could never be contented now,
he could never be happy, and in a year, two years, Marie-Louise,
therefore, would be unhappy, too.  But--but he could not go ... that
night that he had held Gaston Bernier's hand ... and there was
Marie-Louise that he loved ... Marie-Louise with the pure, fearless
face, the great eyes that were full of a world of things, of calm, of
trust, of tenderness and love, the lips, the wonderful lips that were
so divinely carved, the lips like which there were no others.  And he
must choose now forever between Marie-Louise and--Paris.  If he went,
he would never come back.  He was honest with himself now.  He knew
that.  Marie-Louise knew that.  He must choose now.  Choose!  Had he
not already decided that he would--that he would--_what_?

It began all over again, and after that again for a hundred times,
until the brain of the man was sick and weary, and the torment of it
had brought the moisture to his forehead and into his eyes a fevered,
hunted look--and still he lay there, and the hours went by.  And after
a time, beneath the rim of the sea in the west, the sun sank down, and
the golden afterglow, soft and rich and warm, was as a gentle, parting
benediction upon the earth--and Jean's head was buried in his outflung
arms.  And twilight came--and after that the evening--then darkness,
and the myriad, twinkling stars of a night, calm and serene, were
overhead--and it grew late.

And there came a soul-wrung cry from Jean, as he lifted a worn and
haggard face to the moonlight.

"What shall I do?  What shall I do?"




BOOK II: TWO YEARS LATER



-- I --

THE DUPLICITY OF FATHER ANTON

It was early evening in Paris; an evening in winter--and cold.  Father
Anton drew his chair quite close to the little stove that, not without
some prickings of conscience at his prodigality, he had fed lavishly
with coals from the half empty scuttle beside it; and, leaning forward,
alternately extended his palms to the heat and rubbed them vigorously
together.  The room, or rather the two small rooms, that comprised his
lodgings in one of the poorest neighbourhoods of the city, were, since
the windows were tightly closed and the sides of the stove a dull red,
stifling hot; but Father Anton was not a young man, and the winter of
Paris was not the balmy winter of his beloved South.

He took off his spectacles, polished them abstractedly on the sleeve of
his _soutane_, replaced them, and picked up a book.  He opened the
book, turned a few pages without looking at them, and with a little
sigh laid the book upon his knees.  It was only in strict privacy that
he permitted himself an indulgence in regrets and the somewhat doubtful
solace of retrospection.  And now he opened the stove door.  It always
seemed that in the glowing coals and the little spurts of flames one
could picture so much more clearly the blue of the Mediterranean, the
sunny skies, the clean white cottages of Bernay-sur-Mer, the boats
dotting the sea and beach, and Papa Fregeau standing in the doorway of
the Bas Rhône, and Pierre Lachance trudging along the street with a
great pile of nets slung over his shoulders.

Father Anton shook his head slowly.  It was very strange, the workings
of Providence.  He had always thought to die in Bernay-sur-Mer.  And
now already he had been in Paris a year!  But the sacrifice was very
little, it mattered nothing at all, and if he had longings and dreams
of the days that were gone, he was still very happy here and should be
thankful to God for the wonderful work that had been given him to do;
only he remembered his dismay that morning, when, unannounced, the
bishop had come to Bernay-sur-Mer and had told him word had been
received from Paris that Monsieur Bliss, the millionaire American,
would give the enormous sum of five hundred thousand francs a year to
be distributed amongst the poor of Paris on the condition that he,
Father Anton, would undertake its distribution.  And he remembered how
the bishop had explained that it had been suggested to Monsieur Bliss
that perhaps he, Father Anton, would not care to leave Bernay-sur-Mer
and his people there, and that there were others, younger men, nearer
at hand, who, under the guidance and direction of the ecclesiastical
authorities, would willingly and gladly undertake the work.  And, above
all else, he remembered what monsignor had told him had been the reply
of Monsieur Bliss: "No; it isn't because Father Anton is a clergyman
that I want him, it's because he's the man I've been looking for," that
most astounding American had said.  "There isn't any creed, or
religion, or sect, or anything like that in this--or any supervision.
What I'm after is practical results, and nothing else.  I just want a
piece of bread to go where it is needed, and no questions asked.  I've
always had the idea, but I didn't have the man.  I've got him now.
Father Anton might not care to leave Bernay-sur-Mer--eh?  H'm!  There's
five hundred thousand francs a year at his disposal for the poor of
Paris--ask him if he thinks he can do any good with it?"

And so he had come to Paris.  It was magnificent that--the generosity
of Monsieur Bliss!  And Monsieur Bliss was amazing!  He had found a
most beautiful little apartment, most beautifully furnished, in a very
fashionable part of the city, and with two servants already installed,
awaiting him.  Imagine!  It was impossible!  How could one reach the
poor unless one lived amongst them?  And to maintain an establishment
when--Father Anton sighed again--when even the enormous sum of five
hundred thousand francs was all too little!

He glanced around the room.  Even as it was, his quarters must seem
ostentatious compared with the poverty about him--the Widow Migneault,
for example, in the rear room of the _troisième étage_ above him.  But
what could one do?  There was no arguing with those Americans!  They
had insisted on furnishing the place to their own satisfaction.

Father Anton's eyes returned to the glowing coals in the stove.  He was
very happy because his work was the work that he, too, had dreamed of;
but one could not help thinking sometimes of Bernay-sur-Mer, and all
the lifelong friends, and the people who were so close to his heart.
And if he loved to picture them in his mind, and if there was perhaps a
little ache at the thought that he had left them, he was none the less
thankful to the _bon Dieu_ that he could do so much now with what was
left of his life.

What were they all doing in Bernay-sur-Mer to-night?  What was
Marie-Louise doing?  It was two months now since she had written him.
She did not write as often as she used to write.  He shook his head
sadly.  She had had her sorrow, poor Marie-Louise!  What a boundless
store of love there was in that brave little heart!  If only it would
be given to some worthy young fellow now--Father Anton wrinkled his
brows in deep thought, as though he would decide the matter on the
spot--say, Amidé Dubois, who was a fine, honest lad; they would both be
very happy, and Marie-Louise would forget the sooner.  Yes, certainly,
Amidé Dubois would do admirably.

A clatter of hoofs, the rattle of wheels over the cobble stones on the
street, and the sudden cessation of both in front of the house, broke
in on the curé's musings.  He rose slowly from his chair, and, going to
the window, peered out.  His curiosity was rewarded only to the extent
of seeing a fiacre driving away again.  It was rather strange, that!
Fiacres were not in the habit of stopping before any house in that
section of Paris.  It would be some one for him then undoubtedly.
Monsieur Bliss, perhaps.  No; not Monsieur Bliss, for was there not the
grand reception to-night that the Société des Beaux-Arts was tendering
to Jean Laparde, and for which Monsieur Bliss had sent him a card, but
to which he was not going.  It was to be a great affair at which the
President of the Republic was to be present, and a rusty _soutane_
would be not a little out of place there--and besides, the Jean of
Bernay-sur-Mer and the Jean of Paris were not the same.  Perhaps one
should not let such thoughts come--but it was true.

Father Anton listened.  Yes; he had been right.  Some one was knocking
at the door now.

"Yes--come!" he called, and hurried hospitably across the room, as the
door opened--and stopped in stunned amazement--and ran forward again,
holding out his arms.  "Marie-Louise!" he cried.

Half laughing, half crying, she was in his arms; her own around his
neck.

"Oh, Father Anton!  Dear, dear Father Anton!" she was repeating over
and over again.

"Well, well--but, but--well, well," was all he could say--and kissed
her, and pressed her face against his shoulder, and patted her head.

And then he held her off to look at her.  It was the same Marie-Louise,
with the same bright eyes, even if they were glistening now with tears;
the same Marie-Louise, just as though this was Bernay-sur-Mer and not
Paris at all, for there was no hat to hide the great black tresses of
hair, and there was just the same simple style of loose blouse and
ankle skirt that she always wore in the little village, and it might
well have been that he and she were there again, there in
Bernay-sur-Mer--only on the floor, where she had dropped it as she ran
to meet him, was a neatly tied-up little bundle that spoke of the long
journey.

"Well, well!" he ejaculated helplessly again, and closed the door, and
drew her to a chair and sat down, while she knelt affectionately on the
floor at his knees.

"Oh!" she said excitedly.  "I did not think Paris could be so big a
place.  And there was such a crowd in the station, and such a crowd
outside, and so many streets, and all the people I spoke to only shook
their heads when I asked for Father Anton, and--and then I began to be
a little frightened.  And then--what do you think?  Imagine!  Was I not
grand?  For a franc-fifty a _coccer_ said he would drive me to the
address, and--_me voici_!  Did I not do well?"

"Splendidly!" he agreed approvingly.  "But, Marie-Louise, I do not
understand.  It is a great surprise.  You did not write; you said
nothing about coming to Paris.  Why did you not tell me you were
coming?"

She looked up at him merrily.

"Must I answer that--quite truthfully?"

"Of course!" he said, smiling indulgently.

"Well, then," she said demurely, "I was afraid you would say I should
not come--and now that I am here you cannot say it."

"Ah," he exclaimed, with mock severity, "that is a serious confession
you are making, Marie-Louise!  So!  And you thought I would not
approve, eh?  What then has happened in Bernay-sur-Mer?"

"Nothing has happened," she answered--but now she looked away from him
as she spoke.  "I have sold my house there."

"Nothing!  Sold your house?"  Father Anton began to take alarm.  He
took Marie-Louise's face between his hands and forced her to look at
him.  Yes, yes, the gaiety, the lightness of spirit was only
make-believe; the tears were more genuine than the smile that came
tremulously to her lips.  "Marie-Louise," he said anxiously, "what is
it?"

"Nothing!" she said again.  "Only--only I could not stay there any
longer"--and suddenly, in a flood of tears, she buried her face on the
old priest's knees.

"But, Marie-Louise--Marie-Louise!" he protested in helpless dismay--and
laid his hand soothingly on the bowed head.

She looked up in an instant, dashing the tears away angrily.

"I am a baby!" she cried, trying to laugh.  "It was the journey, and
the new things, and seeing you again--but it is over now."  Then, a
little hesitantly: "Tell me of Jean."

"Jean?" repeated Father Anton, startled.  "Jean?"  He looked at her
closely.  Could it be that?  And then, with a little gasp, as he seemed
to read the truth in her eyes: "It--it is Jean then, Marie-Louise, who
has brought you to Paris?"

"Yes," she answered, in a low voice.

The curé's face grew very grave.

"You have heard from him?"

She shook her head.

"I have never heard from Jean since the day he left
Bernay-sur-Mer"--she was plucking with her fingers at the skirt of the
priest's _soutane_.

There was a long silence, broken at last by the old priest's deep sigh.

"You still love Jean, my child?" he asked gently.

"I have always loved him," she said simply.

Father Anton fumbled with his spectacles.  His heart had grown very
heavy.  It seemed that the cruelest, saddest thing in the world had
happened.

"Tell me about him!" she demanded eagerly.  "You see him every day,
father."

"I have not seen Jean in many months," he replied sadly.

"Not seen him!" she echoed in consternation.  "But he is here--in
Paris--isn't he?"

"Yes; he is here," the curé said slowly.  "But Paris is a big place,
and--and even old friends sometimes do not meet often."

"But tell me about him!" she persisted.  "He has become a great man--a
very great, great man?"

"Yes," said Father Anton gravely, "he has become a great man--the
greatest perhaps in all of France."  Then suddenly, laying his hands on
Marie-Louise's shoulders: "Marie-Louise, what is in your heart?  Why
have you come here?"

"But I have told you, and you know," she said.  "To see Jean."

The curé's hands tightened upon her shoulders.  What was he to say to
her?  How was he to tell her of the danger she in her innocence would
never guess, that lay so cold and ominous a thing upon his own heart?
How was he to put into words his fear of Jean for this pure soul that
was at his knees?  As wide as the world was the distance that lay now
between Marie-Louise and Jean--but it was not that, not even that Jean
was openly attentive to Myrna Bliss--that was only a little thing.
Jean was not the Jean of Bernay-sur-Mer.  The man was glutted now with
power and wealth.  And swaying him was not the love of art that might
have lifted him to a loftier plane, it was the prostitution of that
divine, God-given genius for the lust of fame.  And for fame he had
exchanged his soul.  What was there sacred to Jean now?  It was a life
closely approximating that of a roué that Jean lived.  And for
Marie-Louise, with her love a weapon that might so easily be turned
against her, to come in touch with--no, no; it was not to be thought of!

"Marie-Louise," he said hoarsely, "you must go back.  You do not
understand.  Jean is very different now--he is not the Jean--"

"I know," she interposed, with a catch in her voice.  "I know--better
than you think I know.  It is you who do not understand.  He is of the
_grand monde_, I understand that; and I--I am what I am, and it must be
always so.  But I love him, father.  Is it wrong that I should love
him?  I will never speak to him, and he shall never know that I am
here; but I must see him, and see his work, and--and--oh, don't you
understand?"

"And after that?" asked the old priest sorrowfully.

"What does it matter--after that?" she said tensely.  "I do not know."

"No, Marie-Louise," he said earnestly, "no, my child, no good can come
of it.  You must go back to Bernay-sur-Mer."

She drew away from him, staring at him a little wildly.

"But do you not understand?" she cried out with a sudden rush of
passion.  "But do you not understand that it is stronger than I--that I
could not stay in Bernay-sur-Mer because I was always thinking,
thinking--that I could not go back there now any more than I could stay
there before?  I must do this!  I will do it!  Nothing shall stop me!
And if you will not help me, then--"

Father Anton drew her gently back against his knees.  Yes; he was
beginning to understand--that the problem was not to be settled so
easily as by the mere expedient of telling Marie-Louise she must go
back to Bernay-sur-Mer.  Those small clenched hands, those tight lips
were eloquent of finality.  It became simply a matter of accepting a
fact.  He might insist a dozen times that she should go.  It would be
useless.  She would not go!  The old priest's brows furrowed in
anxiety.  This love for Jean was still first in the girl's heart.
Words, arguments, were of no avail against the longing that was supreme
with her, that had brought her on the long journey across all France.
But her love was the love that pictured the frank, strong, simple
fisherman of Bernay-sur-Mer.  If she should see Jean as he really was!
If she should see for herself the change in him, the abandon of his
life; and, too, see the glittering circles in which he moved!  The
first would dispel her love for him; the second would show her in any
case the utter futility of it.  As long as she held this love, that he
had hoped and prayed she had forgotten, it spoiled her life.  It could
only bring her misery, unhappiness and sorrow.  It would hurt cruelly,
this disenchantment; but it would save her, this poor child, whom he
loved as he would have loved a daughter of his own.  Yes; if she should
see Jean as he really was, see him intimately enough to realise the
truth of the life he was leading!  But how could that be brought
about--and at the same time protect her and keep her _safe_?

She rose slowly to her feet, and stood before him, her hands still
tightly shut at her sides.

"I was so sure, so sure that you would help me!" she said miserably.
And then, in pleading abandon, she flung out her arms to him.  "Oh,
won't you, Father Anton, won't you?  Won't you try to understand?  It
can do no harm, only--only it is all my life--just to see him, to be
near him for a little while, to know that it has all been a wonderful
thing for him--and he will never know, I will not let him know."

The curé's hands clasped and unclasped nervously.

"Would you promise that, Marie-Louise?  That you would not speak to
him, that you would not let him know you were here in Paris?"

She answered him almost passionately, in hurt pride.

"Oh, how little you understand!" she cried.  "Do you think that my love
is like that?  Do you think that for anything in the world I would
force myself into his life?  Do you think that is why I came?  Yes; I
will promise that!"

"Well, well," said Father Anton soothingly, "we will see.  But
first--eh?--a little supper?  You are tired, my little Marie-Louise,
and hungry after the long journey.  Come now, you will help me!  We
will make a little omelette, and boil the coffee, and pretend that we
are in Bernay-sur-Mer--eh?"

He began to bustle around the room, setting out bread and cheese from
the cupboard, and putting the coffee-pot upon the stove--and presently
they sat down to the simple meal.

Marie-Louise ate very little; and finally, when she pushed her plate
away, the tears were in her eyes again.

"I cannot eat any more," she said.  "I--oh, Father Anton, you said that
you would see.  You meant that--that you _would_ help me, didn't you?"

It was plain, it was very plain that nothing would distract her for a
moment!  Father Anton sighed again, and got up from his chair, and
began to pace the room.  He had been turning a plan over and over in
his mind while he had watched her so anxiously during the meal.  It was
strange how readily it had come to him, that plan!  A monitor within
whispered the suggestion that perhaps it had come readily because it
was deception!  The curé passed his hand in a troubled way back and
forth through his white hair.  He had seen little of Jean--it was
perhaps because he reminded Jean of Bernay-sur-Mer and the past that
Jean was anxious to forget, that Jean had gradually come, in manner
more than words, to intimate that the old friendship was distasteful.
But if latterly he had seen little of Jean, at least when he had first
come to Paris his visits to the studio had been frequent enough to
enable him to form an intimate acquaintance with Hector, the red-haired
concierge of Jean's studio and apartment, and with madame, Hector's
wife.  Nor had he permitted this intimacy to wane.  He could not forget
that he had loved Jean, and through these good people he still kept his
interest alive.  It was but a few days ago that Hector had complained
that the work was too much for his wife alone, that after some nights
at the studio with a gay company the morning presented a debacle to
clear up that was a day's work in itself.  It was too much for her; and
they came often, those nights.

Father Anton glanced at Marie-Louise.  She was still watching him, a
sort of pitiful, eager expectancy in her face.  His eyes fell to the
floor, as he continued to pace up and down.  It could be arranged.
Jean rose very late.  Marie-Louise could go early in the mornings to
tidy up the studio and the _atelier_.  He could tell Hector she was a
charge of his, an honest girl to be trusted, who would do the work for
a few francs; and Hector in turn could obtain Jean's consent.
Marie-Louise would see for herself the life Jean led--and, besides,
Hector and his wife were not tongue-tied!  But it was a terribly cruel
thing to do!  The old priest's hands clasped and unclasped again in
genuine distress.  It was terribly cruel!  But it was little
Marie-Louise, whom he loved so tenderly, whose future was at stake.  It
must not always be as it was to-day--sadness and hopelessness for the
brave young heart that should be so full of joy and life.

He halted before Marie-Louise.  Yes, it was the right thing to do;
there was no other way; she must be disillusioned; she should see
Jean's life at the studio; and to-night at the great reception she
should see Jean himself.  Only his heart was very heavy--it was so hard
a thing to do.

"Listen, Marie-Louise," he said abruptly.  "I will help you, but it is
on the condition to which you have agreed--that Jean is in no way to
know that you are here.  I will arrange with his concierge that very
early in the mornings, before Jean is up and when nobody is there, you
shall have the care of his studio and _atelier_, so you will be able to
see all you want to of his work; and to the concierge you are simply a
charge of mine who is in need of the few francs you will earn."

"Oh, Father Anton, how good you are!"--she had jumped up joyfully from
her chair, and was in his arms again.  "But I do not want the money.  I
have plenty--from my house, you know."

"But if you took no money, they would not understand why you would
work," explained Father Anton hurriedly.  The depth of his duplicity
was very great!  The gentle soul of Father Anton was conscience
stricken at her gratitude, her innocence.  If he had not gone so far he
would retreat.  She was crying in his arms.  Never before had he known
what it was not to be able to look another in the eyes.  He was glad
that Marie-Louise's head was hidden on his shoulder for he could not
have looked at her.  Father Anton felt himself a criminal.  It was not
a rôle that lay lightly upon him.

"And Jean himself," she whispered.  "When shall I see Jean?"

Father Anton coughed nervously.

"There--there is a reception to-night," he said hesitantly.  He coughed
again.  "For Jean.  You might see him there perhaps--from the gallery.
I--I have a card."

She sprang away from him, with a quick exclamation of excitement.

"Oh, come then!" she cried impulsively, and caught his hand to pull him
toward the door.

Father Anton turned away his head.  Tears had sprung to his eyes.  He
was indeed a criminal--the criminal of the ages!  But if it would save
Marie-Louise!  Ah, yes, he must keep that thought always before him.
He looked at her again, as he fumbled once more with his spectacles.

"Yes, yes; at once!" he said mechanically.  "But"--he was staring at
her now in sudden consternation--"but you cannot go like that!  Have
you no other clothes?"

She pointed at the little bundle on the floor.

He shook his head.

"No hat?  No coat?"

"No-o," she said tremulously, as though she sensed an impending tragedy.

"But this is not Bernay-sur-Mer, Marie-Louise!" he said, in concern.
"You cannot go about dressed like that in Paris; and, besides, you
would freeze, my child."

She looked at him in silence--a sort of pitiful despair, mingling
bitter disappointment and helpless dependence, in her eyes, in the
expression of her face.

"Tut, tut!" murmured Father Anton, pulling at his under lip.  And then
quickly: "But wait--wait!  We shall see!"  And he ran into the other
room.

There were always clothes there--for his poor.  The rich people, the
friends of Monsieur and Mademoiselle Bliss were always sending him
their old things for distribution amongst his poor.  Mademoiselle Bliss
had sent him a package that afternoon.  He remembered that there was a
long cloak and a hat amongst the other things.  Ah, yes; here they
were!  He held them up to look at them in the light from the doorway of
the connecting rooms.  They had strange notions about "old things," the
rich!  These, for example--he turned them about in the light--were as
good as new.  They bought clothes one day, the rich, wore them the
afternoon, and gave them to him the next morning--because overnight
there had been created a new style!  Father Anton smiled at his little
conceit.  But it was almost literally true.  He had seen Myrna Bliss
wearing these very things only a few days ago--the same black velvet
cloak, and the same black velvet turban with the little white cockade.
At least, he supposed it was a cockade!  Ah, well--he shrugged his
shoulders--his poor were the gainers!

"Here, Marie-Louise!" he called out, returning into the front room.
"You may have these, child."

"Oh!" she exclaimed, as she took them.  Her eyes widened.  "Oh--they
are pretty!  But--but, Father Anton, where did you get them?  They are
new."

"No, not quite," he smiled; "but new enough, I think, to last you all
the winter.  They were"--he stopped suddenly, in gentle tactfulness.
Marie-Louise knew Myrna Bliss--it might cause her diffidence if she
were aware that the cloak and hat had been mademoiselle's.  "They were
sent to me by the rich people amongst many other things," he amended,
"to be distributed where"--he smiled again--"where I think they will do
most good.  So now they are yours.  Put them on, and we will go."

"Oh, Father Anton!" she cried again, in wonder at the sudden luxury
that was hers--and slipped on the cloak; and ran to the curé's shaving
glass, which was the only semblance of a mirror in evidence, to set the
turban daintily upon her head.  "Dear, dear Father Anton--how good you
are!"

But Father Anton did not answer.  He was brushing his threadbare black
overcoat--and making a very poor business of it.  There was a great
lump in his throat that refused to go either up or down--and he brushed
continuously at one sleeve, because that was all he could see through
the sudden mist that had come before his eyes.  And then, as he caught
her gazing at him, he put on the coat hurriedly.

"Yes, yes," he said hastily.  "But we are all ready, are we not--eh?
Come then, Marie-Louise, we will go."

And presently they were on the street--and somehow to Father Anton the
crisp cold of the night was very grateful, preferable for once to the
soft warmth of his far-away South, since the hot flushes now kept
coming and burning in his cheeks, as he walked abstractedly along.  And
they were silent for a little while, until a pressure of her fingers on
his arm aroused him, and he turned his head to look at her.  Her
cheeks, too, he could see even in the murky light from the street
lamps, were flushed, and the dark eyes were very bright.

"Couldn't--couldn't we hurry a little, Monsieur le Curé?" she suggested
timidly.

"Hurry?  Ah--you are cold!" he said contritely, and quickened his step.

"No," she answered.  "I--it is only that it might be over--that we
might be too late."

The words brought an added twinge to the already sore and overburdened
soul of Father Anton.  It was the heart of Marie-Louise that spoke, the
heart that had no room but only for Jean.  Ah, yes; but did he not
understand that already!  Had she not come across all France for Jean?
But that was not all!  How ignorant of this great world-city, its life,
its customs, its fineness, its sordidness her words proclaimed her to
be--how dependent they proclaimed her to be!  But did he not know that
too?  How great indeed had been his own bewilderment, and confusion,
and dismay when he had first come to Paris a year ago--even he who was
accustomed to journeying, for had he not gone almost once a year from
Bernay-sur-Mer to Marseilles?  How well he remembered it--but, tut,
tut--of what avail was that?  This was a vastly different matter, a
very serious matter.  Marie-Louise was a woman, so young, so beautiful,
and in her ignorance, in her ingenuousness which was so marked a trait
because she was so purely innocent, she--ah!--he found himself asking
the _bon Dieu_ to watch very carefully over Marie-Louise; and, very
earnestly, with sad misgivings, as a corollary to that prayer, to
forgive him if he were doing wrong in betraying the very innocence, the
trust and simple confidence for which he asked protection for her from
others.

"Father Anton, will--will we be late?" she ventured, evidently alarmed
into the belief, since he had not replied, that so dire a misfortune
was even more than a possibility.

And then he answered her very gravely.

"No, Marie-Louise.  You need have no fear.  It will only have begun;
and even if it were midnight we should still be in time.  Affairs like
this are for all the evening, you see.  Indeed, before going there, now
that I come to think of it, perhaps we had better see about finding
lodgings for you first.  I know several very estimable families in this
neighbourhood who would be glad to give you a room for a small sum, and
you would be quite close to me, and--"

"But could we not do that afterwards?" she interposed quickly.

"Why, yes, of course, afterwards--if we do not stay too long at the
reception," Father Anton acquiesced.  "You would rather do that,
Marie-Louise?"

"Yes!" she said--and the word came tensely--and she pulled impulsively
upon his arm.

And so then they hurried along, and after a little time the streets
grew brighter, better lighted, and from streets became great
boulevards, and from an occasional passer-by they were in the midst of
many people where one must needs elbow one's way to get along; but
Marie-Louise, save in a subconscious way that brought no concrete sense
of meaning, saw none of this--she saw only Jean again, the sturdy,
rugged figure that seemed to stand so clearly outlined now before her,
so real, so actual, so living, as he had been that night when he had
borne Gaston up the path in his strong arms; and the roar of the
traffic upon the streets was as the roar of that mighty storm and the
thunder of the sea breaking so pitilessly, so unceasingly upon the
rocks.  And Father Anton spoke to her, pointing to this and that as
they went along--but she did not hear the curé.  She was listening only
to another voice.  "In just a little minute I shall see Jean ... I
shall see Jean ... I shall see Jean," her soul said.  "I shall see
Jean."

And then she was standing before a great building, and the building was
ablaze with lights, and carriage after carriage, automobile after
automobile was drawing up before a strange sort of canopy where even
the street itself was laid with crimson carpet, and out of the
carriages and the cars poured a constant stream of wonderfully dressed,
fur-clad women and their escorts.  And suddenly she drew back with a
start.  What had she done?  She had stepped upon the soft carpet and in
under the canopy--and a man bewilderingly covered with gold lace, who
could be no less than a Marshal of France, though he seemed so effusive
and polite as he opened the carriage doors to welcome each new arrival,
was fixing her sternly with his eyes.

"Come, Marie-Louise," prompted Father Anton.

She felt the blood leave her face, and she drew very close to Father
Anton, clinging tightly to his arm.  How fast her breath came!  There
was laughter, merriment around her; they pressed against her, they
touched her, these wonderfully dressed people.  How soft the carpet
was!  How one's feet sank into it!  It was a sacrilege that she should
walk upon it!  How that constant murmur of voices rose and fell, rose
and fell!  What were they saying?  It seemed that she should know!
What was it?  Yes, yes!  "Jean Laparde ... Jean Laparde ... Jean
Laparde."  From in front, from behind her, on either side, on every
tongue was the name of Jean Laparde.  And it thrilled her, and her soul
in a clarion echo caught up the refrain.  "Jean Laparde ... Jean
Laparde ... Jean Laparde!"  And it seemed as though a thousand emotions
surging upon her were welded together and massed and made into one, and
that one was comparable to none she had ever known before because it
was too great, and overpowering, and bewildering to understand.  Only
now she could lift up her head, and the blood was rushing proudly to
her cheeks again.

And now they were in a great marble vestibule, and Father Anton was
handing a card to an attendant, and speaking to the man.

"But Monsieur le Curé has full _entrée_--to the floor," the man replied.

She did not catch Father Anton's answer--but the attendant was bowing
and speaking again.

"But certainly, monsieur--as Monsieur le Curé desires.  To the right,
monsieur."

And then there were stairs, beautiful wide marble stairs, and the press
of people was left behind, for there seemed to be but few who climbed
the stairs; and then--and then--she was in a balcony, and below
her--ah, she could not see--it was all blurred before her--and there
seemed a great fear upon her, for her heart pounded so hard and so
fiercely.  And then, strangely, as a mist rises from the sea, it began
to clear away, that blur from before her eyes, and myriad lights from a
massive chandelier, that was suspended from a great dome overhead,
played on the bare, flashing shoulders of women on the floor below her,
played on the jewels that adorned coiffures and necks, played on
glittering uniforms, on a scene magnificent and splendid--and focused,
as her eyes fixed and held, on that one outstanding figure, the figure
that was like to the figure of a demi-god, the only figure, the only
one that she saw now in all that vast assemblage, who stood erect,
strong and massive-shouldered, the black hair, a little longer now,
flung in careless abandon back from the broad, white forehead.  It was
Jean!  It was Jean!

"Jean!" she whispered--and her hand stole into Father Anton's.  "Jean!"

And he was not changed--only that short, pointed beard, that seemed to
add a something, that made him more imposing.  It was Jean, the same
Jean--only there was a grace, an ease, a command, a kingship in his
poise as he stood there, and--yes--yes--they came--one after the
other--the men, the women--and bowed before him.

"Do you remember Monsieur and Mademoiselle Bliss?" Father Anton said
gently.  "See--they are there beside Jean.  And that tall man to whom
they are talking is a very famous statesman for one so young.  His name
is Paul Valmain."

They did not interest her.  There was only Jean.  And she could not
look long enough at him.  There was music playing somewhere, softly,
very softly, scarcely audible above the sound of so many voices all
talking at once, voices that ascended in a subdued roar like the sound
of a shell that one held to one's ear.  She tried to think, and she
could not.  Afterwards she would think.  Now she could only look.

Father Anton touched her arm.  Was it already time to go?  No, no--not
yet!  Not yet--for a little while!  She had come so far, so long a way
just for this--to see Jean.

"It is the President of the Republic coming, Marie-Louise--see!
Listen!"

There was tumult about her.  Those in the gallery around her were
clapping their hands, waving their handkerchiefs; and the music she had
heard playing so softly crashed suddenly into the strains of that song
of glory, immortal, undying, that was cradled in the very soul of
France itself--the Marseillaise.  And as it fired the blood, that
melody, martial, stirring, that men had died for, ay, and women, too,
the outburst around her rose to hysterical heat, and thunders of
applause rolled and reverberated through the room that was bigger than
any room she had ever seen or dreamed of.  And they were calling Jean's
name again--and the President, the great President was there with Jean.

"Jean Laparde!  Jean Laparde!  _Vive_ Jean Laparde!"

She could not see any more.  Her eyes were blinded with tears now, and
they were proud tears, and they were glad tears, and they were
wondering tears that she could not comprehend herself.  Jean's beacon!
Had the _bon Dieu_ permitted her to be that in a little way, given it
to her to have helped just a little, to have had just a little share in
bringing Jean to this great moment, this wonderful triumph?  Jean's
beacon!  How vividly that scene of the years ago came back, when she
had told Jean he did not belong to her--and reliving that scene, here
in the presence of its great fulfilment, she spoke aloud unconsciously.

"It is true!  He does not belong to me.  He belongs to France!"

And Father Anton, because he did not understand, because it seemed that
the disillusionment must have been so much more complete and so much
more cruel and hard to bear than he had feared it would be, and because
her renunciation was accepted so bravely, turned away his head and did
not answer.

And Marie-Louise's fingers closed in a tense, involuntary pressure over
Father Anton's hand--and she spoke again.

"He belongs to France!"

And then, after another moment:

"Take me--back now--Father Anton, please."




-- II --

26 RUE VANITAIRE

Myrna Bliss tapped petulantly with the toe of her small shoe on the
floor of the limousine, glanced at the diamond-encircled bracelet watch
on her wrist, remarked more or less abstractedly that it was a minute
or so after five o'clock, and stared through the plate glass windows at
the backs of her liveried chauffeur and footman.  The reception of the
night before had, so far as she was concerned, been marked by two
incidents, which, at the present moment, were very fully occupying her
thoughts.

It had required all her tact and ingenuity to avert a declaration from
Paul Valmain, which would have been a disaster, because any declaration
was a disaster until that moment arrived when one reached the point
where one began to fear that horrible word "passée" and it became
necessary to accept the inevitable--and marry.  A declaration, as any
one could see, whether it was accepted or refused, had its
consequences--one's proprietorship in a man became either restricted to
that one man alone, which in turn was very like locking one's self in a
cage and handing over the key; or it was lost altogether.  And Paul
Valmain was almost as much run after by her set as Jean Laparde!
Fancy!  Only thirty, a bachelor--and already the leader of his
political party!  Yes, decidedly, besides being amazingly handsome and
amazingly brilliant, Paul was a figure in France!

The man was passionately, madly in love with her; and so was
Jean--which went without saying!  Imagine!  The two lions of social
Paris!  Nothing, not an affair, was complete without them--and she had
only to lift a finger as to two slaves!  Therefore social Paris was
utterly and completely under her domination.  She, literally, was
Paris.  It was very plain!  So long as she exercised a proprietorship
over both of them, Paris was at her feet.  It was not a question of
choice between them--not at all.  Jean was the lion, so much so that
she could even hold court with Jean alone; but with both, her position
was impregnable.  The trouble was--her brows puckered into anxious
little furrows--that at the first opportunity Paul would renew the
attack.  It was very nice to have Paris at one's feet, but it was quite
another matter to keep it there.  Paul, of course, was the more
difficult of the two to keep in hand.  Jean, because he had never
seemed to shake off entirely that diffidence toward her born of
Bernay-sur-Mer, she had so far been able to manage quite simply,
only--her eyes shifted from the chauffeur's back to the toe of her
shoe, and her foot ceased its petulant tapping on the floor--that was
the other incident of last night.

It had happened just after the arrival of the President.  Jean had
sought her out.  She remembered the heightened colour in his cheeks,
the sort of nervous brilliance in his eyes.  He had been drunk--drunk
with the wealth, the glamour, the power that was his; intoxicated with
the fame, the adulation, the triumph of the moment.  He was a glutton
for that--for fame.  There was very little else that mattered to Jean.
He was the supreme type of egoist.  She could dissect Jean very coolly
and with precision, she thought.

"The studio, to-morrow afternoon at five, Myrna--don't fail," he had
said--and had passed on.

There had been a certain air of authority in his tones--to which she
had promptly taken exception, and to which, in an annoying and
persistent way, she still took exception.  Furthermore, it conveyed a
possible, and alarming hint that his docility perhaps was wearing thin.
Well, that would never do at all!  She was going, of course, to the
studio now---but she would take care of Jean!  Five o'clock, he had
said.  She would be a little late--as she intended to be.  At half past
five she had asked Paul Valmain and a choice circle of the younger set
to drop in at 26 Rue Vanitaire, as a graceful little courtesy, so to
speak, to congratulate Jean on his triumph of the night before!  The
grey eyes held a smile in which mockery and merriment were mingled.
One's defences should always be in order!

The small shoe began to tap on the floor of the car again.  What a
short time--what a long time those two years had been since sleepy,
anæsthetised Bernay-sur-Mer!  Jean had attracted her then because he
had been a "new" sensation--and he had attracted her ever since because
he continued to be "the" sensation.  But attraction and love were quite
different, were they not?  Success after success, triumph after triumph
had been his.  It had been astounding, stupefying, magnificent!  At
first it had been the inner circle of devotees of art, such as those
who had gone to Bernay-sur-Mer, who had hailed him; then, in furious
and bewildering sequence, Paris, then France, then Europe--and,
equally, so her letters told her, he was the rage in America.  None
made comparisons--there were no comparisons to make.  The man towered,
stood alone, without rival, as the greatest sculptor of the age.  And,
in a sense, he had not begun.  Men like old Bidelot and her father said
that, stupendous as it already was, his genius had not yet attained its
full development; that, marvellous as was the power, force and realism
of his conceptions, the exquisite beauty of his execution, there still
remained an intangible something yet to be achieved.

Myrna shrugged her pretty shoulders.

"Ah, just that _tout petit chose_!" old Bidelot called it.  "So
fleeting, so evanescent, so--so--" and he would wave his arms like a
grand opera conductor.  "Soul," her father called it, in his turn.
"The boy hasn't lived enough yet.  He'll get it, and then--well,
there's only one word to describe it--immortal!"

Myrna made a wry grimace.  What was the use of all that?  What did they
want?  And what rubbish!  A man whose work was incomparable, that all
the world was going crazy over!  And what, after all, did old Bidelot
and her father know about it, anyway?  Old Bidelot, for example,
couldn't make a piece of clay resemble a doughnut, except for the hole,
if he tried for a thousand years.  And as for her father--Myrna choked
a laugh.

She glanced at her watch again--and then, quickly, out of the window.
It was ten minutes past five, and the car was slowing up in front of
the studio.  In twenty minutes the others would be here--she had told
_them_ to be prompt.  Some day, it was very possible, she might marry
Jean--but not yet.  She was far too well contented with her life as it
was!  She had managed Jean and his tentative outbursts--for his
docility, as she dubbed it, had not been mere tameness--with perfect
success for two years; and now, if, as she was somewhat inclined to
surmise, his actions of last evening presaged another, she was quite
capable of managing that--for twenty minutes.

She alighted from the car, and, instructing her chauffeur that he need
not wait, ran up the steps of the sort of stoop that was over the
concierge's door and apartment beneath.  Hector's red head and
doll's-blue eyes, for once, a little to her surprise, were not in
evidence on the arrival of a car.  The front door, however, was not
locked.  She pushed it open, entered the hallway, crossed to the door
of the salon, and knocked.  There was no answer.  There was, however,
nothing strange about that--Jean, probably, was in the studio proper,
the _atelier_ beyond.  Well, she would surprise him!

She opened the salon door softly, closed it softly, stepped into the
centre of the large, magnificently appointed room, whose decorations
and remodelling she and her father had planned; and, calmly unbuttoning
her long glove, stood looking around her.  And then her fingers held
quite rigidly on a glove button.  She had not seen him as she had
entered!  Jean was rising from a divan behind her, near the door.  Her
arm, still extended, the other hand still on the glove button, she
turned her head and shoulders like a statue on a pivot, to watch him in
amazement.  Without a word, he had stepped swiftly to the door, locked
it--and now he was putting the key in his pocket.

"Jean, what are you doing?" she exclaimed sharply.

He laughed a little--in a low way.  It was the first sound he had made.
She stared at him, a thrill upon her that she could not quite
define--it was not fear; it was more an uncomfortable disquiet, in
which surprise and bewilderment were dominant.  But now, as he faced
her, she noticed that the same high colour was in his cheeks, the same
nervous brilliancy was in his eyes as had been there the night
before--and he was not even dressed, he who was so punctilious in the
late afternoons in that regard.  It was as though he might have but
thrown aside his big sculptor's over-dress, for he was in loose white
shirt with flowing tie, and belted trousers.  Usually she liked him
like that; it seemed to accentuate, bring out, unfetter the splendid
physique of the man; but now--she shrugged her shoulders with
well-affected composure.  Myrna Bliss was too self-poised to be swept
from her feet by any situation.  Jean was acting very strangely!  What
was the matter with him?  She stripped off her gloves coolly, and
tossed her outer wraps on a chair.

"You have been working long hours to-day perhaps, Jean"--her voice
expressed cold disapproval--"you are not dressed yet."

Jean's hand swept the great shocks of hair back from his forehead, and
again he laughed in the same low way.

"I have not been working to-day.  I have been waiting--for five
o'clock."

What did he mean?  She was genuinely disturbed now.  Had he been
drinking--after the reception--through the night--and since?  He was
certainly not himself!  It was outrageous, if it were not in fun, that
he had locked the door!  She walked across the room to the bell-cord
and pulled it.  The bell rang clamorously in the concierge's apartment
below.

"I will have Hector prepare some coffee, while you are upstairs
dressing, Jean," she said imperiously.  "Now, go and dress.  You are
behaving in a most peculiar manner."

He made no answer--only stood there looking at her, his head thrown
back on his powerful shoulders, his eyes still abnormally bright,
though the flush was receding now from the strong, handsome face, that,
as it grew white, grew very set.  Where was Hector?  She pulled the
cord again.  Again the bell jangled in the concierge's below.

"Hector and Madame Mi-mi, his wife, are on a holiday--with five francs
apiece in their pockets--at the Bois, I think--to celebrate last
night"--he jerked out the words in a colourless, even way.

She noticed that his lips twitched, that the knuckles of his hands were
white because his hands at his sides were so tightly clenched.  He had
sent Hector and madame away--she was quite alone in the place with him.
What did it mean?  Jean had never been like this before.  But she was
at least quite mistress of herself!  She drew herself up, walked back
across the room, picked up her gloves and wraps, and returned to the
door.

"Open that door!" she commanded levelly.  "What do you mean by acting
like this?  How dare you act like this?  Are you mad--have you lost
your senses?  Do you realise what you are doing?"

He laughed outright now--with sudden harshness, bitterly.

"Mad?" he repeated in a choked voice.  "Yes; I am mad!  I have been mad
for two years--and I have been a fool.  I am mad now--but I am no
longer a fool.  I am going to know now--I am going to have an answer
now--this afternoon--before you leave this room.  When are you going to
marry me?"

"Marry you?"--she started back.

"Don't do that!" he flung out passionately.  "Don't _act_!  It is no
surprise, that--eh?  You know!  Your soul knows!  I love you--I have
loved you since that first time on the bridge, you remember, don't
you--that bridge--when your eyes turned my blood to fire?  You knew it
then--you know it now!"

Once she had told herself, once in those early days before familiarity,
intimacy perhaps, had blunted the eager edge of curiosity and interest
with which she had studied her new sensation much as one might study a
specimen under a microscope, that the man was a smouldering volcano,
the soul of him elemental and turbulent.  It had grown dim and hazy,
that little mental note of classification--but she remembered it now.
It was true!  Why had she ever lost sight of it?  What would he do?
She was not afraid, only--only--he must not have the mastery, even for
a single instant.  There had been eruptions before--little ones.  She
had always controlled him--he was just like some great, big animal--one
must never let go the leash!  And, besides, some day, probably, she
_would_ marry him!

She laughed now in her turn--shortly.

"And do you think, do you imagine, Monsieur Jean"--her voice rang
sharply through the room--"that you will attain your object any the
more readily by acting like this?"

"Yes; I think so!"--Jean was stepping toward her, reaching out his arms
to grasp her.

"_Jean_!"--she retreated backward, with a startled cry.  The man's face
was positively livid, the eyes were burning into hers.

"I love you!"--his voice was hoarse, shrill, out of control.  "I love
you!  My God, I love you!  Do you think that you can own a man's soul
and not pay the price?  You made me love you!  In a thousand ways you
asked for my love--in a thousand ways you--"

"Jean!" she cried at him again--half running now back across the room.

"Yes, you did!" he shouted passionately, following her.  "Yes, you
did--or you have been playing with me!  But if you have been playing
with me, the playing is ended now, do you understand?  It is ended!
And whether you have been playing or not, you have made me love you,
and you are mine--you belong to me--you shall be mine!  That is how
much I love you!  You are mine--_mine_!  You shall tell that cursed
Paul Valmain to go about his business!  Do you understand that, too?  I
saw you last night!"

She caught at the straw--as, flinging aside the portières in her
retreat, she backed through the archway into the _atelier_.

"Ah, it is that, then?  It is Paul Valmain then, that is the cause of
this!  Well, at least, Paul Valmain is incapable of such actions!"

"There is much that Paul Valmain is incapable of!" he answered
furiously.  "And one thing is that he, or any other man, shall ever
have you!"

She glanced hurriedly over her shoulder.  It was a large room, the
_atelier_, larger even than the salon, but she was almost across it
now, and the huge statue of Jean's "_Fille du Régiment_," his "Daughter
of the Regiment," his newest work, that was nearing completion, blocked
the way.

"Jean," she burst out desperately, "what is it?  What do you mean?
There is no need for this!  There--there was no need to lock that door,
to send Hector away!  Do you know what you are doing?  Have you lost
your reason to treat me like this?  Have you forgotten what--what you
owe to my father--that--that I am his daughter?"

"Ah, you will twist and wriggle, and you will not answer, eh?"--the
words seemed to scorch and burn on his lips.  "It is always like this!
You evade, you elude, you ask other questions.  You know why I have
done this!  I have told you.  I owe your father nothing--nothing!  Do
you hear--nothing!  It is he who owes!  Ask him!  They are his own
words come true.  Ask him what the name of Jean Laparde has done for
him!  He is not merely a paltry millionaire to-day--he is a famous man!
The debt is paid a thousandfold--even to the money, franc for franc,
that he has spent.  You know well enough why I have done this!  It is
not like the days of Bernay-sur-Mer when the poor fisherman dared only
dream and smother the passion in him like some mean, crawling thing,
and thank the God who made him, and hold himself blessed for the crumbs
that were flung to him--a smile from those lips of yours--a finger
touch upon the sleeve, when it seemed all heaven and hell could not
keep my arms back from you!  I have waited!  I let you put me off
until--until the hour should come when no man or woman in the world
should put off Jean Laparde!  Until--yes, _sacré nom de
misericorde_!--until I should be able to forget, forget, forget, do you
understand, _forget_ that I was once a poor fisherman when I looked at
you.  Well, it has come, that hour!  What tribute in all the history of
France was ever paid to man as was paid to me last night?  _Sacré nom_,
it is no fisherman that speaks to you now!  It is I--Jean Laparde, the
sculptor of France!  I am rich!  Kings, princes, the nobles, the world
comes to my door and begs--do you hear, _begs_ the entrée!  What more
do you ask?  My God"--he was clutching at his cravat, loosening it from
his throat, as though it were choking him--"you shall no longer put off
my love!"

She had halted--because she could retreat no further.  The face of the
statue, a life-size figure of a girl in tattered uniform, the corsage
torn, the hair dishevelled, the form crouched a little as though
pressing forward in the face of mighty stress, the hands beating at a
drum that was slung from the shoulders, looked down upon her.  And it
seemed to bring quick, instant, another weapon to her hand.  That
_something_ in the face, those lips!  It was in every piece of work he
had ever done.  All talked of it, all saw it--and wondered.  A strange
exhilaration was upon her.  She was not afraid.  In his passion,
passion like this, Jean was superb.  To have aroused passion such as
this in a man was as to have drunk of wine!  But to yield?
Never--until the day when she was quite ready to yield.  To master him,
hold him, curb him--yes, a thousand times!  His face was close to hers,
his breath was hot upon her cheeks, his hands were stretching out for
her again.  She pushed him away violently.

"You talk of love!" she flashed out.  "What do you know of love?  What
_kind_ of love could you have for me?"  She swept her hand around,
pointing to the statue.  "Who is this secret model that all Paris talks
about--that everybody has been talking about for months--that lives in
the face and always in the lips of everything you do?  That though the
face of one statue is like the face of no other one, yet she is there!
You talk to me of love!  At what strange hours does she come here, that
no one sees her?  How does she come?  Where do you keep her?"

For an instant, Jean drew back, staring at her wildly--but only for an
instant.  The next, he had caught her arm in an iron grip.

"You are clever!" he whispered hoarsely.  "You are too _damned_ clever!
You are at it again, eh--to sidetrack me?  It has been like that for
two years now--always in some way, by some trick, you put me off!  But
you will put me off no more.  You can play no trick here.  We are
alone, and I will not be tricked.  It is not true what you say!  There
is no model like that!  It is a lie!"  His voice swelled until it rang
out in a strong, vibrant note.  "The model is here--here in my
heart--in my brain!  That face and form is the face and form of France!
It is the womanhood of France, the glory of my country!  No man before
has ever conceived it.  It was for me--for me--Jean Laparde--to do!  Do
you hear--it is the face and the womanhood of France!  You do not
understand--you are not a Frenchwoman.  And you do not understand
me--who am a Frenchman!"  His voice dropped low again, hoarse in its
passion.  "You have gone too far!"  His grip on her arm tightened.
"You love me, or you have played with me--it is all the same!  The two
years have made you mine!  You _are_ mine--now--now!  You would starve
my love, would you, you wonderful, beautiful, glorious woman!"

He was drawing her closer and closer to him.  Passion, loosened, freed,
rocking the man to the soul, was in eyes and face, in the half parted
lips, in the short, quick, panting breath.  And for a moment,
fascinated, she was lifeless; then with all her strength she wrenched
and strove to free herself.

"You would not _dare_!" she gasped.  "You would not--"

"Dare!"--the word was a wild, hollow laugh.  "Dare!  Does a man dare to
save his soul from torment?  See--your lips!  Your lips!  Ah, God--your
lips!"

She was his--_his_!  She was in his arms, crushed to him!  His--as his
mad desire had bade him crush her in his arms long since in that other
life in Bernay-sur-Mer; his--as he had dreamed of crushing her in his
arms, of crushing her ravishing form close to him in the dreams of the
days and nights, every day and night since then.  It was all blind
madness, a delirium of ecstasy.  How warm and hot those lips of hers
from which his soul was drinking!  God, how she struggled!  But her
lips--her lips were his--his to rain his kisses of passionate thirst
upon--and upon her face, and upon her eyes, and upon her hair.  If only
she would not struggle so, that he might smother his face, bury it in
the intoxicating fragrance of that hair!

She beat at him with her fists.  He could not hold her still.  She was
strong, strong as some young lioness.  They were swaying around the
room, now this way, new that--and now through the portières into the
salon.  She made no cry--how could she cry?--he strangled the cries
unborn upon her lips with his kisses!  Ah, he had her now--she was
passive at last--her head was bent far back in his arms.  Yes,
now--now!  To feel the life, the heart throb, the pulse of that lithe
form against his own--to hold his lips to hers in a kiss long as all
eternity--to--

And then in a numbed, blank way he was standing back and staring at
her.  Footsteps, laughter, voices were coming from the street outside,
coming up the steps--and, where it had seemed that her strength was
gone, in a paroxysm of terror, of desperation, she had torn herself
away from him.  And now--yes--her face was as white as death itself.
What made it like that?  What had happened?  He passed his hand dazedly
across his eyes.

"Quick!  That door!" she breathed frantically.  "They must not find it
_locked_!"  She snatched up her outer wraps, slipped them on, and, with
a most marvellous display of composure, assumed a languid attitude in a
chair.  Outwardly, Myrna Bliss was quite calm and undisturbed again.
"Quick!  The door--_quick_!" she whispered.

The door!  Some one was coming!  Yes, of course!  His brain was
reeling, stupefied.  The door!  He fumbled in his pocket for the key,
and in a mechanical way turned it in the lock.  And then they were
trooping into the salon, a dozen of them, men and women.

"Wasn't it a charming idea!" some one exclaimed in effusive greeting.
"But the credit is all Myrna's, of course.  We've come, you know, to--"

Jean did not hear any more.  With a start, he raised his head and
glanced down the room.  Myrna's idea--this!  A little twisted smile of
understanding came to Jean's lips.  Self-possessed, animated, she was
already the centre of a group where everybody was talking at once.

And then Paul Valmain's pale, aristocratic, esthetic face came before
him.  The man was bowing, murmuring polite conventionalities; only
somehow the man's eyes, instead of meeting his, seemed to be set with
peculiar fixedness upon some object.  Automatically, Jean followed
their direction with his own--to his own hand hanging at his side.

The door key was still clasped in his fingers!




-- III --

IN THE DEAD OF THE NIGHT

The temptation was very great.  But what would Father Anton say?  What
would Madame Garneau, with whom she lodged, _think_?  To go out at this
time of night!  It was very late.  It was long after midnight, because
it was very long ago when she had heard some distant church clock
strike twelve--and since then it had struck many times, the quarters,
the half hours, only she had lost count.

Marie-Louise drew her cloak a little more closely around her, as she
leaned on the casement of her open window--and then remained quite
still and motionless again.

Irrelevantly it seemed, her thoughts turned on Hector, the concierge.
How very blue Hector's eyes were, and how very red his hair, and
altogether how very droll a figure he made with his absurd
self-importance; and how fat his wife was, whom he so ridiculously
called Mi-mi!  And then that conversation between the concierge and his
wife in Jean's salon early that morning, at which she had been present,
began to run through her mind.

"_Tiens_!" Hector had said to his wife.  "But will she not make the
thrifty wife for some lucky fellow, our little Louise Bern, here--eh?
She is already waiting an hour in the mornings to be let in.  An hour,
mind you, _ma belle_ Mi-mi--and we who think we rise so early!  It is a
lesson that!  Would you have her standing out in the cold?  Why not a
key that she may come in and do her work?"

"But Monsieur Jean," madame had objected mildly, "might be angry if he
knew."

"Monsieur Jean," Hector had replied fatuously, and folding his arms
with an air, "is very well content to leave such matters to me.  I do
not pester Monsieur Jean with details.  On the night after the
reception, even in the exceedingly bad humour in which I found him,
when I told him that I had thought the matter over, and that the work
was too hard, and that you were wasting away--you see, _ma_ Mi-mi, how
I lie for you--and that I had decided--'decided' was the word I
used--that I must have some one in the mornings to help with the work,
did he not say: 'But assuredly, Hector, assuredly; whatever you think
is right.  I depend upon you, _mon ami_.'  And does that not show that
we understand each other, Monsieur Jean and I--eh?"

"It was Father Anton, not you, whose idea it was," madame had corrected
with conscientious earnestness.  "It was Father Anton, that evening
after we had returned from the Bois and before you had seen Monsieur
Jean, who suggested it, and spoke of Louise here.  And that was not
what Monsieur Jean said, for I was listening outside the door.  He said
you were a red-headed buffoon, and to go to the devil and not bother
him."

"And what then?"  Hector, though slightly disconcerted, had rejoined
with acerbity.  "Your tongue is forever clacking!  Do I ever recount an
event but that you must put in your word?  But that is not the point.
It is Father Anton who says Louise is an honest girl and to be
trusted--and that is enough!"

It was not so irrelevant after all.  She was twisting the key in her
fingers now.  The key to Jean's house in the Rue Vanitaire.  How still
the night was!  It seemed so strange that in so great a city where
there were such multitudes of people it could be so still.  It was
almost as still as that other night when she had sat at her window in
Bernay-sur-Mer, that night when the _bon Dieu_ had made her see that
for Jean's sake their ways lay so very wide apart.  She was glad, very
glad that the _bon Dieu_ had helped her then to put nothing in Jean's
way, because Jean had done so very much more even than any one had
dreamed of.

But it was so strange, so strange!  To hear everybody talking about
Jean--on the streets--little snatches of conversation--even here
amongst the very poor--even Madame Garneau, who that afternoon had
stopped in the scrubbing of the floor, and, waving the scrubbing brush
excitedly to point the words, must needs tell her, Marie-Louise, all
about the great Laparde!  How proud they all were of Jean, because Jean
had brought such honour upon their beloved France!  But it was so
strange, so strange--that they did not know--that they did not know
that, oh, for so many, many years it had been just Jean and
Marie-Louise, and glad, glad days, with the blue sky above, and the
strong arms upon the oars--and--and that she loved Jean, that all her
life she had loved him, that all her life until she should come to die
she would love Jean.  It was strange that all these people did not
know, because it seemed that she knew nothing else, because it seemed
to be the only thing in all the world.  But it was good that they did
not know, because otherwise she could not even be here as she was, she
could not even be Louise Bern for a little while, and be near Jean, and
see the work that she loved because it was Jean's work, and
because--and because those marvellous figures that he fashioned seemed
somehow now to mean everything that there was in life for her, as
though her own life were wrapped up In them, given in exchange for
them, as though indeed she were a very part of them, and they were of
her blood and flesh.

She pressed her hands very tightly together over the key, and then
opened them and let the key lay in her palm to look at it in the
moonlight.  She had seen so little in the studio, so very little!  In
the three mornings she had been there, there had always been Madame
Mi-mi to fuss around her, to instruct her in her work, or, failing that
as an excuse--to gossip.  And if it were not madame, then it was
Hector--and often it was both.  And she had so wanted to be alone
there--it was not very much to ask, that--just to be alone there for a
little time with Jean's things around her, to be very quiet, to be
alone.

Why should she not go now?  It was not a sin that she would commit.  It
was only that if Father Anton knew, or Madame Garneau knew they would
not understand--but they would never know.  No one would ever know.
Jean would be upstairs asleep; and Hector and his wife would be
downstairs in bed.  That statue, that wonderful statue of the girl with
the drum, would be more wonderful than ever with the bright moonlight
pouring in upon it through that great glass roof of the _atelier_.  She
had seen so little of it, because when she was there it was always
wrapped up in damp cloths; she had seen it only when that absurd Hector
had exhibited it to her with a patronising air as though he had
modelled it himself, making use of a flood of technical expressions of
which she did not understand a word, and of whose meaning she was quite
sure he was equally ignorant, but having heard the words around the
studio repeated them like a parrot.  She had seen so little of it, when
her soul cried out to see so much.  It haunted her, that statue--why,
she did not know.  It was before her always--in her dreams, which were
always dreams of the salon and the _atelier_, the figure with the drum
always stood out above everything else, even though everything else,
even though the very smallest things and details there were so dear and
intimate too.  Was it a sin to go and stand and look, when her heart
was so full of the longing that it would not be denied?  Who was there
to say, "you went to Jean's studio at two o'clock in the morning,"
when, in the quiet and the stillness there, there would be only
herself, and that great figure with the drum, and the _bon Dieu_, who
made Jean do such wondrous things, to know?

She turned from the window and tiptoed across the little room, and took
the little black velvet turban with its white cockade, that Father
Anton had given her, down from where it hung upon a nail on the wall,
and fastened her cloak tightly about her for fear that it might brush
against something and make a noise, and stole then to the door, and out
into the hallway, and to the front door of the tenement.  Yes, she
would go--but no one must know--only herself, and that great figure
with the drum, and--and the _bon Dieu_, who would understand.

And so she went out into the night, and across the city, and to the Rue
Vanitaire, and to Jean's studio; and all the way her heart was beating
quickly, and she was a little frightened, and avoided the people that
she met, for no one must know--and even at the last, when the goal was
reached, and she stood before the house and saw that it was dark in all
the windows, and she had only to enter, there came even then a little
added thrill of fear.  The street, she had thought, was deserted, and
suddenly, as she stood there, it--it seemed as though some one hiding
across the street had stepped out of concealment, and as suddenly had
disappeared again.  She caught her breath, and stood for a long tense
moment gazing in that direction.  And then at last she smiled a little
tremulously.  It--it was only a shadow.  Yes, she was quite sure now
that it was only a shadow--she could see the flickering of the street
lamp on the wall of the building, where she had thought she had seen
something else.  It was very foolish of her to be like this.  She had
never been afraid in Bernay-sur-Mer--only everything here was so
strange--and it was very late--and--and she was going into Jean's
studio--and no one must know.  And then she mounted the steps very
cautiously, and unlocked the door and closed it softly--and in another
moment, slipping across the hall, past the foot of the stairs that led
to Jean's sleeping apartments above, she had entered the salon and shut
the door behind her.

It was quite dark here, too dark almost to distinguish anything--the
only light was a tiny, truant moonbeam that strayed in from the
_atelier_ between the portières of the archway.  It was in there--the
great figure with the drum!  But she would not go there for a moment
yet.  It was here, too, that Jean was present in everything about her.
It was here that his friends, those that he cared for now, the people
of the _grand monde_ came to see Jean.  She could not see the things
around her, but they were very clearly pictured in her mind--the
beautiful rugs, so soft and silky to the touch, that hung from the
walls; the queer, spindly furniture, that did not seem made for use at
all, that she had been afraid to touch at first for fear it would
break, it looked so fragile; the dark, glossy floor, like a mirror,
that she had polished only that morning; the--her thoughts were
suddenly, disturbingly, flying off at a tangent.

That morning!  It brought a quick twinge of pain to Marie-Louise's
heart.  The salon had been--had been--oh, she did not know how to
describe it--only Madame Mi-mi had said it was often like that, that
Jean led the gay life, and why not, since he had the _sous_ to pay and
was rich?  There had been broken glasses, and confusion, and callous
ruin of things that were priceless, and cards strewn over the
floor--and--and somehow she had not been able to keep her eyes from
being wet all the time she had been cleaning up the room.  It--it made
her heart very heavy, and very sorrowful.  And yet, too, in a way, she
could understand--because she understood Jean.  Long, long ago she had
been afraid--afraid of his success for him, even while she had prayed
for it.  If Jean had only a mother, only some one whose love would hold
him back.  If he were married--if he had a wife--it would change all
this sort of life that he led now.  Yes; if he were married!  She could
think of that quite calmly, in a perfectly impersonal way.  Why should
she not?  Some day Jean would marry--marry some one out of this new
world in which she had no part, which to her was so very strange and
foreign and hard to understand; but which to Jean was so natural, and
which, henceforth, could be the only life he would know.  Yes; she
could think of his marrying quite calmly.  And why not?  She had no
longer part in that--she had passed out of Jean's life long ago, that
day in Bernay-sur-Mer.  Perhaps it would be Mademoiselle Bliss--Hector
had hinted at it and winked prodigiously.  She found her hand clenching
very hard at her side.  It seemed very, very strange, and it was very,
very curious that, while she could think quite calmly of Jean marrying
some one because it would be very good for Jean to marry, a pang came
and her heart rebelled when the "some one," instead of being vague and
general and indefinite, became a particular "some one" that was very
definite and was not vague at all!

Marie-Louise sighed a little.  She did not understand.  Everything was
so hard to understand.  She sighed again--and then, walking slowly
across the room, she parted the portières and stepped into the
_atelier_.

Here, for an instant, she stood hesitant, just inside the archway,
looking about her.  How bright the moonlight was, and how it poured in
and bathed everything in its soft luminous glow, except that,
strangely, there seemed to be a shadow on the white-wrapt statue of the
girl that puzzled her for a moment--ah, yes, it was the door of the
dressing-room, the room where Hector said the models prepared for their
poses, that was wide open and kept the moonlight from the statue.  She
moved forward, closed the door quietly, and went then and uncovered the
clay figure and stood before it.  She could look her fill now--yet it
seemed that she could never do that, for her craving and her longing
were insatiable.  All other things in this life of Jean's, in this life
of hers that she was living for a little while, filled her with dismay
and confusion; but this, this work of Jean's, this figure before her
was real, it seemed somehow to bring her closer to her own world, to
those things she could understand.  She did not know why--only that it
was so, and that it was perhaps because of that the girl with the drum
had been haunting her so constantly.

She sat down at last on the little platform that served Jean to stand
upon for his work.  It thrilled her, made her pulse leap, this strong,
magnificent figure of womanhood, this torn and tattered soldier-girl;
and one sensed and felt and lived, it seemed, the battle-wrack around
the figure; one saw, it seemed, the stern, set-faced, shot-thinned
ranks that followed to the beating of the drum; one listened to catch
the tramp of feet, the hoarse cheers, the roar of guns.  It seemed to
be the call of France, the call to victory and glory, or to death
perhaps, but to dishonour never; it seemed to breathe the love of
country that was beyond all thought of self, fearful of no odds; it
seemed to mean that in the heart of France itself lived the courage
that had never measured sacrifice; it seemed as though those clay lips
parted, and above the din of conflict, of battle and of strife she
could hear the voice ring out in deathless words: "Forward--for France!"

But it was not only that alone that held her enthralled.  It was the
face, with the moonlight full upon it now.  It was beautiful, it was
glorious--but there was something more.  There was something in the
face that seemed to stir a memory, a world of memories within her.
There was something familiar in the face--there seemed to be something
there that she recognised and yet could not define.  She had seen that
face all her life--all her life.  It belonged to every one that she had
ever known in Bernay-sur-Mer--and yet it belonged to no one at all that
she could name.  But then--it was not finished yet.  Perhaps when it
was finished she would know.  It would be finished now in a few days
more, Hector had said; and he had said, too, that it would be the
greatest work Jean had ever done.

If she could only watch it until it was finished!  If she could only do
that--afterwards she would go away.  It was only for a little while
that she had come to Paris--only for a little while.  If she could do
that!  If she could come to-morrow night, and the nights after that
until it was all finished, just as she had come to-night!  Yes,
yes--_yes_!  Yes, she would come!  She would watch it grow, and watch
so eagerly and so tensely the face that was so well-known yet so
elusive now!

"_La Fille du Régiment_!"  Her hands cupping her chin, she sat there as
motionless, as silent as the statue itself; sat there absorbed,
unconscious of the passing time.  It was strange the face should be
familiar!  It was strange that there, too, had been something familiar
in the face of that figure in the park that Father Anton had taken her
to see, in the face of every other figure that the curé had pointed out
to her as Jean's work!  She had gone back to look at them alone; but
they, although they were finished, had not answered her question, had
not told her who they were.  But this one, this one was _almost_
telling her now--there was only to come a touch, just a touch from
Jean's hand--that would perhaps be there when she came to-morrow
night--and then she would know.

And so she sat there, and the hours passed, and the moonlight faded,
and the grey of dawn crept into the room--and Marie-Louise roused
herself with a start.  And at first dismay was upon her.  It was
morning--too late to go home!  And then she shook her head, and smiled
happily--happily, because she had spent glad and happy hours, and there
was no need to be dismayed.  Presently, she would go about her work--to
which she had come early, that was all.  And at her lodging, Madame
Garneau would find the bed made because it was always made before she
left there in the morning, before Madame Garneau was up.




-- IV --

THE ACCUSATION

There was a sullen, angry set to Jean's lips, a scowl on his face that
gathered his forehead into heavy furrows, as, at his accustomed morning
hour, a little after nine, he entered the _atelier_.  He had not slept
well the night before--nor for the nights before that--not since that
afternoon here with Myrna.  How could one sleep with things in the mess
they were--to say nothing of the night before last when he had not
tried to sleep, and had held high revel with a few choice spirits in a
sort of dare-devil challenge to the premonition that promised him a
reckoning for those few moments in which he had sought to quench the
passion that raged in his soul, that set his brain afire!

He crossed the room, mechanically donned his sculptor's blouse, or
over-dress, threw off the wrappings from the "Fille du Régiment,"
picked up a modelling tool, stepped upon the platform--and stared into
the face that looked back at him from the high-flung, splendid head of
clay.  He snarled suddenly, clenching his fist.  They prated to him of
secret models!  Bah!  It was too much for them!  They could not
understand--it was beyond them--that was all!  It was there, all of it,
the courage, the resolution, the purity, the strength, the virility of
the womanhood of France--all--all--it was all there--and they thought
it wonderful, incomparable--only they prated of a secret model--_nom de
Dieu_--when it was themselves, when it was France that was the
model--and they had not grasped the apotheosis of their separate
individualities in the sublime glory of the composite whole!  Ha,
ha--perhaps it was because they were modest!

He smiled with intolerant contempt.  They prated of a secret model,
they applauded, they cheered, they showered him with wealth, with fame,
the world knew the name of Jean Laparde--and, because they were unable
to comprehend, they asked for something more, something that, no doubt,
should label his work like raised letters for the blind--and then
perhaps it would be only to find that they had still to acquire the
alphabet!  Bah--it was sickening, that!  But it was also maddening!
There was old Bidelot, who came each day to the studio.  Bidelot was a
fool--a senile old fool, who sat and wept weak tears because the statue
was so beautiful; and wept weaker tears because, like a spoilt child,
he cried for something that he wanted without knowing what it was!

"You talk--you rant--you whimper--you bemoan!" he had flared out
angrily at Bidelot yesterday afternoon.  "Well, what is it?  Do you
find it a pitiful affair, then, my '_Fille du Régiment_'?"

"Ah, Jean!  Ah, no!  Ah, no!" old Bidelot had cried.  "It is not that!
It is exquisite, it is magnificent, it is superb, it transcends
anything the world has ever seen.  It is so great that if only there
were a little something, ah, _mon_ Jean, a little something, it would
be the work of a god and not a man!"

"And that something?  What is it?" he had demanded.

And old Bidelot had wrung his hands, and the tears had coursed down his
cheeks.

"I do not know!  I do not know!" the famous critic had answered almost
hysterically.  "If I knew I would tell you.  It is but a touch--but a
touch."

Old Bidelot was emotional--an ass!  Old Bidelot was fast approaching
his dotage!  Jean shrugged his shoulders wrathfully.  It was not true,
of course!  It lacked nothing, that face--and yet--and yet that sort of
thing disquieted him, irritated him.  It was a masterpiece--and its
only fault was that it had not been made by a god!  _Ciel_!  Was there
ever anything more absurd than that!  Well, in any event, it was to
bring him one hundred and twenty-five thousand francs; and his next
commission, which was for the Government of France, would be for double
that amount.  Old Bidelot and his "touch"!  For France, when this was
finished, he would do that dream statue, if--_damn_ that dream statue!

Jean snarled again.  What was the matter with him!  The cursed thing
was always in his mind; but never would it come and appear before him,
lifelike and actual, that bronze figure of the woman, as once it had
done.  Instead, it seemed to have faded more and more completely away,
until it was as invisible as the base of the statue which he had never
been able to see at all, and yet at which the passers-by in his dreams
had gazed with the same rapt attention as at the woman's figure--it had
faded until the whole existed simply as an indistinct blur upon the
memory.  If he could visualise that figure again, get the detail, he
could supply a base of some sort that would go with it; that would come
simply enough once he got to work.  _Would_ it!  He had thought until
his brain was sick, for hours on end, trying to imagine a fitting
subject, big enough, splendid enough to harmonise with what he
remembered was the majestic beauty of the woman's figure--and the hours
had only made the task seem the more beyond him, his each succeeding
imaginary design the more inadequate and pitiful.

It made him angry now, increased and inflamed his already irritable and
savage mood.  Why had he started in to think of that!  Why, in heaven's
name, should he think of everything that morning that he did not want
to think of!  Why, when nothing else would come, should the cold,
enigmatical face of Paul Valmain staring at that confounded key, come
so readily before him, and--he hurled his modelling tool suddenly,
savagely, into the far corner of the room; and, stepping down from the
platform, pulled viciously at the bell.  He was yanking his blouse off
over his head, as Hector appeared.

"Get my car, Hector!" he snapped tersely.  "I am going out."

Hector's blue eyes widened in amazement.  The car in the morning--the
morning that was sacred to work!

"The car, m'sieu?" he repeated, as though he had not heard aright.

"Yes, imbecile--the car!" Jean snapped again.

"But, m'sieu!"  It was unheard of!  It had never occurred before!  "But
is m'sieu not going to work this morning, and--"

"The _car_!"

"But, yes, m'sieu--instantly--instantly, m'sieu!" Hector stammered--and
retreated hastily from the room.

Jean followed him--spent a few impatient moments kicking at the
sidewalk while he waited; and then, at the wheel of his big, powerful
machine, went tearing up the street.  Work!  It was worse than useless
in the vile humour he was in.  The car had been an inspiration; he
would go nowhere in particular, but he would drive--fast.  That was
what he wanted, some excitement, some exhilaration.  He would go out
into the country, anywhere, with the whole day before him, and--no!  He
would go first to Myrna's house!  Why not!  He scowled heavily again.
It was getting beyond endurance, that sort of thing!  There had been
three, no, four days of it now!  The decision quite fitted in with his
mood--whatever might be the result.  Yes, _nom d'un nom_, he would go
there--and at once!

It was but a short way; and, at the expiration of a few minutes, Jean
stopped his car in front of the magnificent residence that Henry Bliss
maintained in a style that was almost regal, jumped out, and ran up the
steps.

"Mademoiselle Bliss," he said to the liveried automaton that answered
his summons.

"Mademoiselle Bliss is out, Monsieur Laparde," replied the man.

"Very well, then--Monsieur Bliss," returned Jean, a little grimly.

"Monsieur Bliss is not at home, Monsieur Laparde," replied the man.

Jean bit his lip.  That Henry Bliss might still be away, since he had
gone to London some days before, was probably true; but that Myrna was
out at ten o'clock in the morning--the man, under instructions, was
lying, of course!  He stood hesitant, his rage increasing, half
inclined to reach out and twist the neck of this bedecked
functionary--and then, with a short laugh, he swung on his heel, went
down the steps again, and climbed back into the car.

The car shot forward in a savage bound.  She was probably watching him
from behind the curtain of a window!  His hands clenched fiercely on
the steering wheel--and he flung the throttle wide.  It was enough!
This had lasted long enough!  It was her idea of punishment, perhaps!
"Mademoiselle Bliss is out, Monsieur Laparde"--he mimicked the
colourless-voiced flunky viciously.  To telephones, personal calls--the
same answer; to notes--no answer at all.  Well, she would answer--and
soon!  He would take care of that, and--he jammed the brakes
frantically on the machine, as a figure, barely escaping disaster as
the result of his reckless driving, jumped wildly away from in front of
the car; while a voice shouted in sharp protest:

"Hey, there--where are you going!"

"To the devil!" snarled Jean--and chuckled the next instant with sudden
malicious delight, as he recognised the other.  It was Father Anton--on
his way to the Bliss residence, probably.

"You are travelling fast, my son!"--grave and quiet, the note of
protest gone, Father Anton's voice came back from the curb--and then
the old priest was blotted from sight, and the car was speeding down
the boulevard again.

Hah!  Father Anton!  Father Anton--the grandmother!  Father Anton, who
had thought on arriving in Paris to lecture him, Jean Laparde, on how
he should live, and sermonise on the pleasures of the flesh, and the
dangers of power and wealth and position, and to haunt the studio with
a sanctimoniously grieved expression everlastingly on his face!  Ha,
ha!  Father Anton!  Father Anton was the man who once had preached so
fatuously on the nothingness of fame!  Well, Father Anton, if he were
not blind, could--again Jean checked the car violently, this time in
response to a harsh, strident, authoritative command.

And then a gendarme was running alongside, gesticulating furiously--but
the next moment the man was touching his cap.

"Ah, it is Monsieur Laparde!  _Pardon, mille pardons_, Monsieur
Laparde!"  The man's voice dropped to a low tone, as he leaned in over
the side of the car.  "But if monsieur will be good enough to have a
care.  It will get us into trouble if we do not do our duty, and
monsieur would not like that to happen.  Ah, monsieur"--at Jean's
five-franc piece.  "Ah--"

The car was off again.  But now Jean laughed aloud.  Fame!  Who was
there that did not know Jean Laparde--from the President of France to
the gamin of the gutters!  It began to salve a little his irritation,
his ugly mood.  To the devil with Father Anton--as he had just now had
the pleasure of intimating to him.  There was little that was empty in
the fame that was his.  Wealth had been poured upon him; there was
nothing, nothing that was beyond his reach, nothing that he could
desire and be obliged to refuse himself; and, yes--_'cré nom_, one
could say it for it was true--throughout all France he was worshipped
as though he were a demigod.  He had only to enter a café anywhere, and
in a moment from the tables around he would catch the whispers: "Look!
There is Jean Laparde, the great sculptor!"  And position--what man in
all of France, or in Europe, occupied a position comparable to his!
None!  There was none!  He would change places with no one!  He owed
allegiance to none; he received it from all.  He received the cheers,
the acclaim of the populace; the decorations of governments and
royalty!  And none could take this from him.  It was his!  And there
were to be years of it--all the years he lived.  He was young yet.
Years of it!  He was Jean Laparde, Jean Laparde, Jean Laparde--the man
whose name sent a magic thrill even to his own soul.  God, how he loved
it all with a passion and a desire and an insatiability that was rooted
in his very breath of life!

The car was speeding now out through the suburbs of the great
city--on--on--on!  His thoughts were bringing him exhilaration in
abundant measure; something in the sense of freedom, in the swift
motion, brought him elated excitement.  His blood was whipping
buoyantly through his veins.  There would be a day of this--to go
somewhere, anywhere--without plan, or predetermination, this road or
that, it mattered not at all--a day of it--prompted no longer by the
sullen, disgruntled mood that had caused him to set out, but by a more
potent and saner spirit of almost boyish vagabondage that bade him keep
on.

Myrna!  He smiled now.  He was a fool to have spoilt the last few days
for himself just because he had not seen her!  Let her have her way for
a while, if it pleased her!  No doubt she was trying to discipline him!
It was delightful, that!  Discipline Jean Laparde!  It was he who would
play the rôle of disciplinarian before he was through--not she!  He
loved her, wanted her--and, by Heaven, he was Jean Laparde!  And what
Jean Laparde wanted was his!  She belonged to him, and his she would
be, and no other man's!  Paul Valmain, eh?  Next time he would deal
with Paul Valmain, and not with Myrna.  The poor fool--who ranted and
raved and screamed like a cockatoo on the floor of the Chamber of
Deputies, and dreamed that it was impassioned eloquence!  It would be
well for Paul Valmain to take another road than that of Jean Laparde!
The poor fool--that did not know the power of Jean Laparde!  He held
Paul Valmain, as he held every other man in France, between his thumb
and forefinger--to pinch, if he saw fit.  A whisper in the ear of this
one and that, and Paul Valmain was as dead politically as though he had
never been born.

And now Jean threw back his head and laughed boisterously.  All that
was no exaggeration; it was literally true.  He even held Myrna in
exactly the same position.  He could break her socially--as readily as
he could break a twig from a tree!  It was even ludicrous, it was so
simple.  Imagine Myrna in such a state!  Imagine what would happen if
he let it be known that Jean Laparde would attend no function at which
Mademoiselle Bliss was a guest!  It was too funny, too droll!  And she
had dreams perhaps of disciplining Jean Laparde!

His face flushed a little.  She was his!  He had felt those warm, rich
lips against his own!  He would feel them there again a thousand
times--ay, and soon again!  He would not wait this time--as he had
waited, fool that he had been, before!  But for a day or so, if it
pleased her to ride upon a high horse, let her go fast and
furious--afterwards, that was quite another matter.  Afterwards, those
lips would be his again, that glorious, pulsing body would be in his
arms again--and in the meantime--here was a great level stretch of road
before him--and the day was before him--and the to-morrow could take
care of itself!

And so Jean rode far that day; and lunched at a quaint little village
near the Belgian frontier; and quite lost himself; and dined in a
farmhouse; and finally, set upon the road again, reached Paris after
midnight, where he alighted in front of his club.  He was in a "humour"
now, as he put it himself.  A little supper and a hand at cards would
complete, round out a day of rare delight.  He was even humming an air
to himself, as he entered the club.

"_Pardon_, Monsieur Laparde!"--the doorman was bowing respectfully.
"Monsieur Valmain is in one of the private writing rooms--the one at
the head of the stairs, monsieur."

Jean stopped his humming, and stared at the man.

"Well--and what of that?" he demanded.

"But, monsieur!" murmured the man, a little abashed.  "Monsieur expects
to meet Monsieur Valmain, does he not?  Monsieur Valmain left word."

Jean scowled, and passed on.  Paul Valmain!  Paul Valmain!  Paul
Valmain!  What devil of perversity had seen fit to drag Paul Valmain
upon the scene?  Was his day to be ruined by a bad taste in his mouth?
What did the man want?

He went upstairs, knocked upon the door indicated, and, without waiting
for an answer, opened it rather brusquely, stepped inside--and, with an
exclamation of angry surprise, gazed at the man who seemed literally to
have rushed across the room to confront him.  Paul Valmain's face was
positively livid, the eyes burned as though consumed with fever, the
hands shook, and the tall form quivered in the most astonishing
fashion.  Was the man mad?

"Ah, Monsieur Jean Laparde!" the other cried out.  "You have come at
last!  You saw fit to absent yourself to-day!  I have been five times
to the studio!  But you thought it better to answer my message finally,
eh?  You did well!  I should have gone again in an hour to dig you out!"

Jean eyed the other for a moment, contempt struggling with bewilderment
for the mastery at the man's actions and incoherent outburst.

"You have perhaps been drinking," he said coldly.  "I received no
message until I entered the club here an instant ago.  And I am not to
be 'dug out,' Monsieur Valmain!  You are using strange language.  If
you are drunk, apologise; otherwise--"

"Otherwise!"--the word came like a devil's laugh from Paul Valmain; and
before Jean could move, or, taken by surprise, guard himself, the flat
of Paul Valmain's hand had swung in a stinging blow across Jean's
mouth.  "You--_hound_!"

The blood came surging into Jean's face, and with a bound he had the
other by the shoulders--and then, somehow, he found himself
laughing--not merrily--laughing in a sort of contemptuous rage.  He
could take Paul Valmain with his own great strength and do with him
what he pleased.  But that was not the way a blow such as he had
received was to be answered!  And, anyway, what was the matter with the
man?  He must have lost his senses!

"You--hound!"--Paul Valmain was repeating hoarsely, his lips twitching
in his passion.  "I watched last night outside your studio.  I watched,
and oh, God!--I saw her enter."

Jean's hands dropped from the man's shoulders in blank amazement.  Yes,
certainly, the man was either drunk or mad!  Certainly, he was not
responsible for what he was saying.

"There was no one who entered my studio last night," he said almost
pityingly.

"You liar!"--Paul Valmain was like a man beside himself, demented.
"You liar--you liar--you liar!  I saw her!  I know now who this secret
model is whose divine form you desecrate, you black-souled libertine!
I saw her go in at two o'clock in the morning--_and at daylight she had
not come out again_."

Jean shrugged his shoulders intolerantly.  The man was quite out of his
head from some cause or other, but that was no reason why he should be
called upon to endure the other's irresponsible ranting.

"You poor fool!" he exclaimed irritably.  "So you know who it is, do
you?  And what then?  If it brings you such poignant, personal grief,
why did you let her go in?  Why did you not tell her that--"

"It was too late"--white to the lips, Paul Valmain raised his clenched
fists--"it was too late--after months of it!  I could save her only one
thing--the knowledge that I knew her shame.  I was across the street--I
saw her--God pity me--I loved her--the black cloak and hat she wore
only a few days before when we were together!  I have lived in hell and
torment and fear that it might be so since that afternoon--that
afternoon--did you think I did not see the key in your hand, and--"

"What do you mean?"--there was a sudden blackness curiously streaked
with red before Jean's eyes; the blood was sweeping in a mad tide
upward in his face to pound like trip-hammers at his temples--the man's
words could bear only one interpretation, a hideous one, that outraged
his soul, and roused a seething fury within him.  "What do you mean?"
he said again between his teeth.

"I mean," Paul Valmain answered, "I mean--damn you, you know what I
mean!  I mean that from two o'clock in the morning until daylight Myrna
Bliss was in your rooms, and--"

"You devil from hell!" Jean shouted--and leaped at the other's throat.
If the man struggled he did not realise it.  The man was only an
impotent, powerless thing in his grasp--and he flung him away, flung
him crashing to the floor.  "I will kill you for that!" he whispered.
"To-night--you can find a friend downstairs to act for you--I another."

Paul Valmain staggered to his feet.

"I have waited all day for the same purpose!"  The devil's laugh was on
the grey lips again.

"It is _à l'outrance_, Monsieur Valmain--you understand!"--Jean choked
in his fury.  "_A l'outrance_!"

"As you shall see!"

"And the studio--if it suits you!  We shall not be disturbed.  There is
room there, and you will find it as pleasant a place as any in which to
die!"

"Where you will!" retorted Paul Valmain.  "Where you will--so there is
no delay!"




-- V --

THE SECRET MODEL

Marie-Louise glanced quickly up at the house.  Yes; it was all dark!
There was no light in Hector's apartments below; nor in the salon; nor
in Jean's rooms above.  She had scarcely dared to look, for fear that
she had come too soon, that Hector perhaps was still up, that Jean
perhaps might be with some of his friends in the salon.  But it was all
dark.  She was quite breathless, for she had run nearly all the way
from Madame Garneau's in her eagerness; but that did not matter at all
now, for she was not to be disappointed, since, after all, she had not
come too soon.  It was much earlier than it had been last night, when
she had come for the first time to be all alone there in the studio in
the moonlight, where the hours had passed so swiftly and been all too
short; but it had seemed that the day would never end, that night would
never come again, and the evening had dragged so cruelly as she had sat
by her window--and so when that church clock from somewhere in the
distance had struck midnight she could wait no longer, for perhaps
to-night Jean would have finished the face, and perhaps to-night it
would not all be so vague and trouble her so because it seemed that in
some strange way it was so familiar, though she could not tell why.

She took the key from the pocket of her dress, and stole softly up the
steps.  How glad she was now that she had not waited any longer!  She
would have so much more time there in the _atelier_ with the wonderful
figures that Jean made, that were not clay at all, but that breathed
and lived, and to whom she could talk about Jean, and about his great
triumph, and tell them all that was in her heart, and they would listen
to her and understand as no one else could, and never tell any one that
she had been there.  And she would not be afraid of them at all any
more, not even at first, as she had been last night because they looked
so ghostlike in the white cloths that were wrapped around them.

She looked hurriedly about her, then opened the door, stepped inside,
and crossed noiselessly into the salon.  She could not quite still the
pounding of her heart, because it was night, and because it was dark,
and because she was doing something that no one must know; but she was
not at all afraid now.  Since last night she had been so sure that
there was nothing to fear.  Hector and Madame Mi-mi had thought it the
most natural thing to find her working there that morning when they had
got up.  Was it not for that she had been given the key?  And to-morrow
morning again when daylight came it would be the same; and now--she was
hurrying through the salon to the _atelier_--and now she was to see
that splendid, glorious figure, the "_Fille du Régiment_," again, and
see the face that perhaps, oh, perhaps to-night, after Jean's work of
the day upon it, would be finished, and that she would recognise.

She slipped between the portières into the moonlit room, and--she could
not wait even to take off her cloak and turban--tiptoed eagerly,
excitedly across the _atelier_, mounted upon the modelling platform,
and threw back the white damp cloth, revealing the figure's head.  And
then, for a moment, she could only gaze at it, puzzled and bewildered;
and then, very slowly and regretfully, she sat down upon the platform.
The face had not been touched.  It--it was exactly as it had been last
night.  Somehow, Jean had not done any work that day--or else, perhaps,
he had worked on some of the other figures.

She sat staring at the face of the clay figure in a disappointment that
was almost dismay--and then suddenly she smiled.  After all, it was she
herself who was the cause of her disappointment; she had wanted to see
that face with its finished touch so much that, in her eagerness, she
had quite made herself believe that she would find it so--whereas it
might be days and days yet before Jean would have completed it.  And
instead of being disappointed, she should be very happy that the _bon
Dieu_ had made it possible for her to come here at all, to be so close
to Jean, and to be able to spend these hours here with his work--and
even if it were days and days before it was finished, could she not
still come here every night until it was done, and could she not still
be able to see it then?

As she looked around her, the white-wrapt figures seemed to nod to her
and promise her that it would be so.  How quiet and still it was, and
how peacefully the moonlight filled the _atelier_--Jean's _atelier_.
It was so different a scene from that magnificent reception where
France in all its glory had honoured Jean; where the marble stairs, the
lights, the throngs, the glittering uniforms, the marvellously dressed
women with their furs and jewels had awed and frightened her, and yet
had filled her, too, with ecstasy because it was Jean's triumph, and
had brought thankfulness into her resignation because she had seen with
her own eyes how great he had become and how little had been her own
sacrifice to achieve so much.  Yes, it was strange how different was
that scene and this around her now--and yet they were both so intimate
a part of Jean's life.  And they were so very different to her in a
personal way.  She did not want to see that world of the rich and the
great any more, because she could not understand it, and no one there
could understand her; but here--she was so glad and happy to be
here--here she could understand, and here these figures understood her
when she spoke to them because they knew that she had given all she had
to give, not out of her own strength but out of the strength that the
_bon Dieu_ had given her, that they might be created by Jean's hands.
Here, Jean was so near to her; there, in that other world, he was so
far away--so far away that she had gone utterly out of his life, even
out of his thoughts.

She sighed a little as she sat there on the modelling platform; and
then there came again that little smile of self-reproof, and with it a
chiding shake of her head.  It was well that it was so.  There was no
other way.  It would have brought only distress and pain to Jean if he
were always to remember, and--and it was far better so.  The gulf
between them was so wide and deep that it could never be passed, and if
she were still living in Jean's heart it could only make life a very
terrible thing for them both.  And so--and so--yes, she should be very
thankful for that, too; be very thankful for both their sakes that he
had so entirely forgotten her.

The white-wrapt figures seemed to nod most gravely in assent again--it
was only a tree branch in the courtyard frolicking with a moonbeam and
sending a little playful shadow over them that seemed to make them
move, but that was how they always talked to her, and made their
understanding seem so real.

She sat quite still for a little while, gazing at the face of the
"_Fille du Régiment_" before her; and then, clapping her hands softly
together and with an impulsive little exclamation of delight she stood
up excitedly.  Perhaps Jean had been working upon the statue, even if
he had not touched the face.  And, anyway, there was more to see than
just the face--the figure itself was just as wonderful, just as
beautiful.  Quickly, but very carefully, she loosened and removed the
covering from the body and base of the figure, let the covering fall
upon the floor--and, stepping back to look at it, stood suddenly
transfixed, her hands pressed tightly against her bosom, her face white
with fear.

Some one was coming!  She strained her eyes across the _atelier_,
holding them for an instant, fascinated, upon the portières.  No, no;
surely she had been mistaken!  It could have been only fancy, and--a
low cry came from her lips.  The front door had closed; there were
footsteps in the hall, a number of them it seemed; and--and that was
Jean's voice!

"The salon, messieurs, if you please!"

They were coming!  They were entering the salon!  What could she do?
She could not get away or escape!  There was no way to get out!  They
were already in the salon!  She looked wildly, helplessly around
her--and then, with a little gasp that mingled relief and trepidation,
her eyes fixed on the door of the models' dressing room.  She began to
steal toward it, holding her breath.  How terribly her heart pounded!
She could not go very fast, because then she would make a noise and
they would hear her.  And that was Jean's voice again, this time from
the salon itself, from just on the other side of the portières, it
seemed.

"The _atelier_ will serve us better than this polished floor,
messieurs."

Oh, if she could only reach the dressing room in time!  How hoarse
Jean's voice seemed to be!  She was nearly there now--nearly there!  If
only the _bon Dieu_ would help her!  It was only a step more--just one!
Now--now she was there!  She slipped into the little place that was
hardly any bigger than a large closet, and drew the door shut behind
her, as the portières were swished apart and the rings on the pole
clattered with a terrifying noise.  And then she found that she was
very weak, and that her knees were trembling as though they would give
way beneath her.

It was very dark.  She dared not move for fear she might knock into
something and make a noise.  She told herself that she must stand very
still.  She could hear them out in the _atelier_ now in a muffled sort
of a way; they were walking around and around, and it sounded as though
they were moving things about.  And then she seemed to go cold with
fear again, and a sense of dismay surged upon her.  The "_Fille du
Régiment_" was uncovered!  She had had no time, even if she had thought
of it, to replace the covering.  What would Jean do?  Would he think it
was an accident, that the wrapping had been carelessly done, would he
blame Hector, or--would he think some one had been there, that some one
was perhaps there now, and--and suppose he should come to the dressing
room door, and open it, and--and find her there!

She was frightened now, terribly afraid--more afraid than she had ever
been in her life before.  If Jean should find her there, what would he
think of her?  The blood rushed in a fierce crimson tide to her face.
She would rather die than that!  But it was not only herself, it was
not only that--there was Jean.  She had no right to obtrude herself
into his life and to disturb it.  But surely--surely the _bon Dieu_
would keep him away from the door!  She had been very foolish and very
wicked ever to have come, ever to have risked so much, only the
temptation had been so great, and her heart had pleaded so hard;
but--but if only no harm should come of it all this time, she would
promise that--that she would not come there any more like this at night.

Perhaps he had not seen it!  Perhaps he had not noticed it!  And yet it
was not just moonlight out there any more, and the _atelier_ was
lighted now, for she could see the tiny rays as they filtered in under
the door where it did not fit well over the threshold.  She listened
intently, almost expecting to hear Jean cry out about the covering of
the "_Fille du Régiment_," but they still seemed to be moving around a
great deal, and the voices were indistinguishable, and she could
understand nothing of what they were saying, except only a name that
she caught because it was repeated several times--the name of Paul
Valmain.  It seemed somehow to be familiar.  Yes; she remembered.  He
was one of Jean's friends of the _grand monde_, the man that Father
Anton had pointed out beside Monsieur and Mademoiselle Bliss in that
group with Jean on the night of the great reception.

It seemed as though hours were passing as she stood there.  It seemed
to grow unbearably hot in that small, dark place; it seemed even that
it was hard to breathe.  Perhaps it was her fear that was suffocating
her!  She unfastened the black velvet cloak and let it hang more
loosely, wide apart, upon her shoulders--and held her hand agitatedly
upon her bare throat, that was now exposed by the low-necked blouse.
Would they never go!  And what were they doing there?  It was very
strange!  They seemed to keep on tramping and even running around, and
there was no sound of voices now--only a most peculiar sound that made
her think of Papa Fregeau when he stood in the kitchen of the Bas Rhône
and sharpened his carving knife on his long bone-handled steel.

Then all grew suddenly quiet--and the quiet was as suddenly broken by a
voice, loud enough and distinct enough for her to hear.

"It is nothing!  But a touch, monsieur--continue!"

Marie-Louise's eyes widened, and slowly her form grew rigid and tense,
and her hand at her throat slipped away and caught at the neck of her
blouse, and in a spasmodic clutch tore it wider apart.  That voice--she
did not know whose it was--but there was no mistaking the cold, sullen
fury in it.  And the tramping of feet had begun again--and that sound
again, the rasp of steel, was hideous now, bringing her a sickening
dread.

It was as though for a moment she were too stunned to move.  They were
fighting out there in Jean's _atelier_--with--with swords.  And
perhaps--perhaps it was Jean who was fighting.  And if--if he should
be--no, no!--she dare not even let the thought take form in her mind.
But she must see--somehow, she must see!  How dark it was, and how
those sounds brought terror now!  She could not stand there and--and
think; she must see that at least it was not Jean, or else--or else she
would scream out in her agony of suspense.

She groped out with her hand for the door.  She could open it very
silently, just a little way--they would be too occupied to notice it.
Her hand trembled as it fell upon the knob.  She pushed the door open a
crack, an inch.  There seemed to burst in upon her, in upon the
contrasting utter darkness, a blinding light that dazzled her so that
she could see nothing; and to burst in upon her a horrible riot of
noise--heavy, panting gasps for breath, the quick shuffle of feet upon
the floor, the grating, the ring, the metallic grinding of rapier
blades.

In terror, she pushed the door open another inch--and held it rigidly,
as, suddenly, her heart seemed to stop its beat.  There came a gurgling
moan--then--then an instant's deathlike silence--and then, with a wild
cry, she flung the door wide open, and, as it crashed back against the
wall, she stumbled out into the _atelier_.

She could see now, but it was as though it were not herself at all who
looked around the room, for her brain seemed suddenly to be acting in
an impersonal, numbed, apathetic way.  She could see everything very
clearly, but it was as though some one else, not she, were seeing it.
She stretched out her arms before her like one who was blind to feel
her way, and started across the _atelier_.  She should have run, she
should have run so fast, so fast, something within her told her she
should run, but her limbs seemed scarcely able to support her
weight--she could only stumble across the _atelier_ with her arms
stretched out.  That was not Jean who stood in the centre of the room
holding a rapier in his hand, it was Paul Valmain.  And the man who
stood beside Paul Valmain was not Jean.  And there were two other men,
but neither of them was Jean.  But they held a silent, grey-faced,
unconscious form in their arms that they were lowering to the
floor--and that was Jean.  And they looked at her as she came, looked
at her in so strange and startled a way; and Paul Valmain took a step
toward her, and cried out, and drew suddenly back--and then--and then
she was on her knees, and Jean's head was gathered into her arms, and
he was so white, so terribly white, and he made no sound--and--and--

"Jean!  Jean!"--she was crying his name passionately, piteously, crying
it over and over again.  "Jean!  Jean!"

And he made no answer--only lay there white and still.  And then some
one took her arm and tried to draw her away--and some one spoke to her.

"Mademoiselle must permit me," the voice said gravely.  "I am the
doctor."

They took Jean from her, and the man who had said he was the doctor
bent over Jean--and, still on her knees, she watched them.  Why should
they take him from her--now?  It could do no one any harm now that she
should have Jean, when Jean did not know, when perhaps--she lifted her
head quickly, lifted it far back until the white throat and bosom lay
bare; until the pure, glorious face, with its wonderful contour, its
divinely beautiful lips, tense with outraged grief, looked full into
another face that was thrust suddenly before her.  It was Paul Valmain
who had done this, and he dared to come and stand over her now, and
hold in his hand the--why did she not scream out---the blade was red!

"Look!  Look!"--his face ashen, Paul Valmain was pointing to the
unwrapped figure of the "_Fille du Régiment_."  "The face--the lips!"
he whispered hoarsely.  "The lips--it is you who are his model!  It was
you--last night!  That hat!  That cloak!  My God!" he cried out, and
the rapier, falling from his hand, clattered upon the floor.  "My God,
what have I done!"




-- VI --

"JEAN MUST NOT KNOW"

Jean's model!  Even in that moment, when it seemed that all else was
extraneous, that nothing mattered save that white face, that still form
on the floor, the thought brought a strange, troubled amazement--but it
was gone almost instantly, as her mind, still refusing to centre on
anything but the one great fear that perhaps Jean might die, carried
her swiftly back to what was passing around her.  She looked again at
the doctor as he knelt on the floor and worked with deft fingers over
Jean, and something in those grey hairs, in that kindly face, even if
it were so grave now, gave her a little courage--surely, surely he
would not let Jean die; she looked at the man who, too, was kneeling
beside Jean--but he meant nothing to her, she could only wonder why he
was there; she looked at Paul Valmain--and shuddered.  It was Paul
Valmain who had done this, who perhaps had killed Jean--and he was
still staring at her in such a fixed, horrible, fascinated way.  She
rose quickly to her feet, clenching her hands.

And then the doctor, raising his head suddenly, was speaking in quiet
tones:

"I need hardly say that if Monsieur Laparde recovers, we are in honour
pledged to secrecy, messieurs.  Monsieur Vinailles and I will carry
Monsieur Laparde upstairs to his bed, so that clatter-tongued concierge
and his wife will know nothing of this--and to-morrow, if they are told
that Monsieur Laparde has met with an accident it will be enough.
Monsieur Vinailles and I will attend to everything here; and I would
suggest, Monsieur Valmain, that you and Monsieur LeFair withdraw at
once.  I will send you a report in half an hour."

Paul Valmain shook his head.

"No," he said, in a low, shaken voice.  "LeFair will go--I remain
here."  He pointed suddenly to Marie-Louise.  "I must speak to
her--alone.  Go, LeFair--wait for me at my rooms."

Marie-Louise drew hurriedly back.

"No, no!" she exclaimed sharply.  The man filled her with abhorrence;
and now, besides, he was trying to keep her away from Jean--and
nothing, nothing in all the world would make her leave Jean's side now.

But no one seemed to be paying any attention to her--not even Paul
Valmain any more, who had turned away, and, whispering as he went, was
walking rapidly into the salon with the man they had called LeFair.
The doctor had slipped his wrist through the handle of his black bag to
leave his hands free, and he and the other man were lifting Jean up in
their arms--and then, numbly, as they carried him from the room, she
followed.

She saw nothing now only Jean's face, so ghastly in pallor, with its
closed eyes, and with the black hair tumbling over his forehead.  It
brought a greater fear upon her; but she kept telling herself that she
must be brave, for perhaps they would let her help them when they got
upstairs, perhaps there would be something that she could do.

They went on through the salon, and out into the hall, and began to
mount the stairs--and then some one, hurrying from the direction of the
front door, caught her arm.

"Wait, mademoiselle, wait!" a voice said hoarsely.  "Wait--I must speak
to you!"

It was Paul Valmain again.  She pushed him violently away from her,
and, without looking back at him, went on after the others.

On the landing at the head of the stairs, they halted for a moment to
open a door, and then for the first time the doctor appeared to notice
that she had been following.

"_Pardon_, mademoiselle," he said a little brusquely.  "If mademoiselle
will be good enough to wait below!"

They were trying to keep her from Jean again.  Every one tried to keep
her from Jean.  She clenched her hands passionately.  But now--now they
should not keep her away any longer.

"No!" she cried out fiercely.  "You shall not send me away!  I will not
go--I will not!"

He stared at her for an instant, then shrugged his shoulders.

"Very well, mademoiselle.  It is perhaps your privilege.  I have not
time to question it.  But since you remain, perhaps you will be good
enough to help us."

"Yes!" she said eagerly.  "Oh, yes!  Tell me what to do."

"Water!" he said tersely.  "A basin--cloths!"

With a quick nod of understanding, she ran ahead of them through the
door, and hurried on down the hall.  She had never been there in Jean's
apartment before, but Madame Mi-mi had not been loath to tell her all
about it--and so it was not strange to her, and there was something to
do now and that seemed to relieve the dull pain that had been torturing
her brain, and she could remember again every little detail that Madame
Mi-mi had described.  The sitting-room, the dressing-room, the bedroom,
the dining-room, and from the dining-room into the kitchen--it was a
complete menage, though Jean used it so little, save to sleep there,
and for his _déjeuners_ which Madame Mi-mi prepared.  She procured the
basin, filled it, and hurried back with it--going through the rooms
this time instead of the corridor--to where in the bedroom they had
placed Jean upon the bed.  And then there were the cloths--a sheet
would serve best for bandages, and that was kept in the linen closet,
where too there were clean towels, Madame Mi-mi had said.  She could
think very clearly now, and she could be much more brave because there
was something to do.  She flew to the closet, tore a sheet into strips,
gathered up some towels, and returned with them again to the bedroom.

The doctor glanced at her approvingly.

"Thank you, mademoiselle," he said, in a much more kindly tone.  "That
will be all for the present."

But if they were more kindly, his words, they were too a sort of
dismissal.  She did not know what to do for a moment; and then she went
slowly to the foot of the bed and knelt down--she would be out of their
way there, and ready in an instant if the doctor called again.  She
would have given so much to help him in the intimate way this Monsieur
Vinailles was helping, to hold Jean, to touch Jean, but--but they
seemed so occupied, both of them, and--and she must not interfere.  She
could only watch, while the agony of suspense crept upon her again;
watch the grey-haired man, in his shirt sleeves now, working so
quickly, so silently--and then suddenly she turned away her head, and
her heart sank with dread.  It was so terrible a wound that she had
caught sight of in Jean's side, as the doctor straightened up for an
instant!  It--it did not seem that any one could live with--with that.
And Jean lay so still, so motionless, and in his unconsciousness seemed
so much like--like dead.  She shivered a little, and fought back the
tears, and tried resolutely to think of something else--of anything--of
how beautifully Madame Mi-mi had told her Jean's rooms here were
furnished.

She forced herself to look around her.  Yes, yes, it was as Madame
Mi-mi had said--the carpet seemed to shine as though it were of silk;
and the bed was very large and made of brass, which was something she
had never seen before; and in all the rooms, as she had passed through
them, she had been conscious that everything was very magnificent, just
as the salon downstairs was very magnificent.  And here on that big,
carved dresser were wonderful candlesticks like those Father Anton used
to have at the altar in Bernay-sur-Mer, only these were perhaps real
silver, just as Father Anton had said that some day, when the parish
grew very rich, theirs would be instead of only looking like it,
and--she turned quickly back again toward the bed.  Monsieur Vinailles
and the doctor were speaking.

"But what would you have!" Monsieur Vinailles was exclaiming in a low
voice.  "I know no more than you what it was about--and neither does
LeFair.  We tried to bring about an understanding, LeFair and I, before
we called for you, or at least get them to consent to a delay in which
their tempers might cool; but neither Valmain nor Jean would listen to
us.  Not a word!  If LeFair and I would not act for them, they would
get some one else.  _Voilà tout_!  What would you have!"

"H'm!" returned the doctor gruffly.  "Well, then, Vinailles, as I shall
not need you any more for the moment, I think you had better go and
tell Monsieur Bliss what has happened."

"_Sacré_--no!" ejaculated Vinailles.  "I prefer some one else should do
that!  And besides, I do not think that he has returned to Paris yet."

"Then Mademoiselle Bliss," insisted the doctor quietly.  "It is all
one!  They are Jean's family, as it were, are they not--eh?  And then
is not Mademoiselle Bliss as good as his fiancée?  Well?  I consider
that she, or Monsieur Bliss, or both of them, should know."

"You mean," said Vinailles, in a startled tone, "that Jean is--"

"I mean nothing!" answered the doctor bluntly.  "He is a long time
unconscious, and he is not responding well to stimulants, that is all.
On the other hand, you need not unnecessarily alarm any one; if I get
him through the next hour or so, and no septic complications set in
later on, we'll have him on his feet in a few days.  If you take Jean's
car you should be back in fifteen or twenty minutes.  Go at once,
Vinailles."

"Very well," Vinailles agreed a little reluctantly--and left the room.

What did the doctor mean?  Marie-Louise crept timidly around to the
opposite side of the bed where she could watch his face, and where she
could see Jean's face too.  What did the doctor mean?  If--if
everything went right, Jean would be well in a few days, but--but he
was in danger now.  She questioned the grave face piteously with her
eyes--but received no response.  The doctor was bending over Jean, and
did not look up.

The minutes passed, ten, fifteen perhaps, as she knelt there--and then
it seemed that she could not endure it any longer, and that all her
self-restraint was at an end.

"Jean!" she whispered--and because they were stronger than she, and
because she could keep them back no longer, the tears came in a flood,
and she reached out and caught Jean's hand that was outstretched on the
bed, and held it between both her own, and buried her face between her
own two arms.

She felt the doctor's hand laid gently on her shoulder.

"Do not give way, mademoiselle," he said soothingly.  "Courage!  We
shall win, I promise you."

She grew quieter after a little while--and again she tried to think.
They had sent for Mademoiselle Bliss, and very soon mademoiselle would
be here.  It was the mademoiselle who had spoken to her so sharply that
day because she had not put on her shoes and stockings....  Hector had
said that Mademoiselle Bliss and Jean were to marry ... and--and that
was what the doctor had just said to Monsieur Vinailles ... and--and so
it was true.  And what then?  What--if Mademoiselle Bliss found her
here?  She would do Mademoiselle Bliss no harm to stay here!  Her hands
closed tighter over the one in her grasp.  How cold Jean's hand was!
What would she do--what would she do?  She did not want to go, it
seemed so hard to go, and it was so little to ask, so little out of all
her life, just to stay there and kneel beside Jean and hold his hand,
and--she raised her head, quickly, suddenly.  The hand in hers twitched
a little, there came a half moan, half gasp, and then Jean's voice,
mumbling, wandering, reached her.

"Gaston, see, we are back!  Put your arms around my neck, _mon brave_,
and I will lift you up, and--"  The words grew thick upon his tongue,
lost their coherence, and died away.  And then he began to speak again,
and Marie-Louise leaned closer to catch the words.  "See, it is a
beacon--and it is for you, Marie-Louise, because it is you ... _sacré
nom_, why do you say that? ... I can make a thousand ... has it not
those lips that I could fashion even in the dark ... a thousand, I tell
you ... how--not another, when--"

"_Tiens_!" exclaimed the doctor briskly.  "That is good!  He is
regaining consciousness now, and--heh!--but what is the matter,
mademoiselle?"

With a startled little cry, Marie-Louise was on her feet.  She was
vaguely conscious that, while they seemed to call up all her life, all
the old life of Bernay-sur-Mer, her life and Jean's when they had been
together, Jean's words too held some strange relation to something that
had just happened here that night, some strange, puzzling, bewildering
significance--and that then all this seemed swept away from her on the
instant before a still greater significance in the doctor's words.
What had the doctor said--that Jean was returning to consciousness!  It
brought joy and gladness and hope surging over her; but it brought too
something cruel and hard and cold, as though a sentence had been
pronounced upon her.  She must go now, whether she wanted to or not.
Jean must not see her.  It was not Mademoiselle Bliss she had to
consider now--it was Jean.  He must not see her--he must not even know
that she had been there.  He must not, he must not see her--he must not
know!  And then a sort of panic fear seized her, and she ran around the
bed to the doctor's side.

"Monsieur, monsieur, I must go!" she cried agitatedly.  "And he must
not know--he must not know that I--that--that any one has been here.
Monsieur, will--will you promise that?"

"But, mademoiselle!"--he looked at her in amazement.  "But,
mademoiselle, I--"

She caught his hands wildly, and dropped upon her knees.

"See, monsieur, see, I beg it of you!" she pleaded almost hysterically.
"It is not much to ask--that you will not tell.  Promise me, monsieur,
promise me!  Why should he know, why should any one know?  I have done
no harm!  And it--it is for his sake that I ask it.  Monsieur,
monsieur, you will promise!"

"I see no reason now why I should say anything," he answered gravely;
"but if I promise it must be with a reservation.  I will promise you,
mademoiselle, that unless circumstances leave me no choice I will say
nothing."  Then, quickly, as he leaned toward the bed: "But if he is
not to see you, you must go at once!"

"Yes!" she breathed.  "Yes!  You are good, monsieur--you are very, very
good.  And--and Monsieur Vinailles, and Mademoiselle Bliss, if Monsieur
Vinailles should have told her--you will not let them tell Jean any one
was here?"

"I will speak to them," he said quietly.  "But go then, mademoiselle,
immediately!"

"And--and, monsieur"--her voice breaking--"Jean will not--not die?"

"No, mademoiselle, he will not die, I think I can promise that now
without any reservation," he replied with a smile.  "But, _ma foi_, if
he is not to know--eh!"

She stole a half frightened, half wistful glance toward the bed--then
ran from the room and out into the hall.

"He must not know!  He must not know!"--she kept saying that to
herself; repeating it again and again, as she went slowly down the
stairs.  It seemed as though those were the words that summed up her
life, that she had been saying them in her soul ever since the day
those strangers had come to Bernay-sur-Mer.  "Jean must not know!"

She halted suddenly on the lower step, and her face whitened a little.
Paul Valmain was standing in the doorway of the salon.  He was still
here then, this Paul Valmain, the man who--who had tried to kill Jean!

"Mademoiselle!" he cried out.  "See, I am still waiting!  I must speak
to you--here--in the salon--in the _atelier_ for a moment!"

It seemed that she must run from him, that she abhorred him--and
yet--and yet--"Jean must not know!"  She must get Paul Valmain to
promise too--Paul Valmain, and that other man who had been with him.

"Mademoiselle!" he said again.  "I--"

"Yes," she said--and stepped past him through the salon door.




-- VII --

MEA CULPA

The man frightened her.  He had caught her arm the moment she had
entered the salon, and had hurried her roughly across the room and into
the _atelier_; and, besides, his face was ghastly it was so colourless,
and it kept twitching, and his eyes burned with such an unnatural light.

"My arm, monsieur!" she cried out.  "You are hurting me!"

He laughed at her in a hollow way, and only tightened his hold, as he
pulled her in front of the clay figure of the "_Fille du Régiment_."

"Stand so!" he burst out.  "With your head--so!  As you were when you
came from that dressing room!  So--so!"--he pushed her chin up, and
grasped her by the shoulders.

"Monsieur!" she cried out again, and struggled to free herself.
"Monsieur, what are you doing?"

"Wait, I tell you!" he almost shouted.

Frightened before, she was terrified now, and besides she hated the man
with all her strength, and her soul shrank from him because it was he
who had so nearly killed Jean; but she had come to plead with him, she
must not forget that, only--only he was acting so strangely.  And then
suddenly, startling her, she remembered that it was he who had said she
was Jean's model.  That was why he was staring so wildly first at her
and then at the face of the girl with the drum, and back at her again,
and then at the clay figure.

"It is so!" he said hoarsely.  "It is so!  But wait--wait!"  His hands
dropped from her shoulders, and he ran from one figure to another about
the studio, pausing before each one to gaze at it fixedly and intently.
"The lips--always the lips--always your lips--the wonderful,
inscrutable lips that all France is forever raving about!"--the words
came in sharp, broken snatches.  "Never the face in its entirety, but
always the lips--and always with the lips some additional feature, the
forehead, or the poise, or the eyes--always you!"

At first she followed the man with her eyes in a sort of incredulous,
fearsome wonder; and then slowly, seemingly without volition of her
own, drawn to it as by a magnet, she turned to face and stare at the
figure of the "_Fille du Régiment_."  Was it true, could it be true
that it was she, her lips that Jean had made there in those lips of
clay?  Was that what that strange sense of familiarity had meant, and
which she had not understood?  No, no--Jean had forgotten, forgotten
long ago!  It was not true, it was not possible!  And yet--and yet they
_were_ her lips--her eyes would not lie to her.  And this then was what
had seemed to give a significance, that she could not explain at the
time, to those words of Jean's of a little while ago.  This man Paul
Valmain had said she was Jean's model before she went upstairs, and
then Jean had talked about the beacon.  "It is a beacon--and it is for
you, Marie-Louise, because it is you ... has it not those lips that I
could fashion even in the dark?" he had said.  She had not been able to
connect the two things then; but now--now she knew.  Jean's model--all
through those two years she had been Jean's model!  And yet how could
it be possible!  The very thought seemed to leave her abashed--it--it
seemed as though she were committing a sacrilege to let herself imagine
that she, who was only Marie-Louise Bernier, a fishergirl of
Bernay-sur-Mer, was the model for Jean's beautiful work that made all
the great people of France so proud to call him one of themselves!  It
was not strange that she had failed to understand what that sense of
familiarity in the clay faces had meant--she would never, never have
dared to think of such a thing by herself--and it would have been so
far away, that thought, that of itself it would never have come.  Why
was she suddenly so weak now, as though a wondrous joy, so great that
it overwhelmed her, was surging upon her--and why was that cold fear,
that seemed to tell the joy that it was trespassing where it had no
place, stirring within her?  What did this thing mean for her--that
those lips of clay were hers!  It brought so much, so many different
emotions, and each of them was so overpowering in itself, and they all
came crowding so upon her at once, that it seemed she must cry out in
her cruel bewilderment.

And then Paul Valmain was standing before her again.

"So!"--he flung out his arms.  "So--it is out at last, the secret!  He
has kept you well under cover, mademoiselle!"

The words came to her with a shock, rousing her from her thoughts.  He
did not understand.  He must not think that Jean knew; because that was
why she was there now--to tell him that Jean must not know.

"No!" she said quickly.  "No, no, monsieur!  And, oh, monsieur, you
must not let--let Jean know that I was here to-night.  It--it is some
mistake about--about the model, monsieur.  He has not seen me since he
has been in Paris, and--"

"What!" he broke in harshly.  "You deny that you have been coming here?"

"Only last night, monsieur," she said eagerly.  "Only last night for
the first time."

"It is well that you admit at least that!" he jeered, in a sort of
furious irony.  "I congratulate you, mademoiselle!  My profound
respects!  In a single visit then you have accomplished wonders, even
with so beautiful a face and figure!  You have made Jean Laparde famous
all over the world; and you have made me perhaps--a murderer!"

She stared at him wide-eyed.  What did he mean?

"But, monsieur--monsieur--I swear it to you!" she stammered.  "It was
only last night for the first time."

He laughed mirthlessly, and shrugged his shoulders.

"As you will, mademoiselle!  A night or a thousand spent with Monsieur
Laparde, it is all one to me!  It is your own affair!  But"--his voice
rose suddenly in uncontrollable passion--"but, _sacré nom de Dieu_,
there is something that is my affair!  That cloak!  That hat!  Where
did you get them?"  He was clutching with one hand at the garment,
pulling at it with vicious twitches to emphasise his words.

She drew back from him, the blood hot and burning in her cheeks.  A
night or a thousand with Jean!  He thought--he thought--_that_!  And he
talked of her hat and cloak!  What did they matter, what did anything
matter, except that--that shameful thought of his that stabbed at her,
and, with its sudden pain, brought a horrible giddiness and a horrible
ringing in her ears?

"Answer me!" he cried fiercely.  "Why are you wearing those things now?
Where did you get them?  Why were you masquerading last night in that
hat and cloak, that belong to Mademoiselle Bliss, when I saw you enter
here?"

"Mademoiselle Bliss!"--she could only repeat the words numbly.  "It is
her hat and coat?"  The room seemed to swim around her.  She put her
hands to her eyes.  A new terror was creeping upon her.  The hat and
cloak belonged to Mademoiselle Bliss!  Vaguely, dimly, understanding
began to come.  He had thought that she was Mademoiselle Bliss, and
because of that--no, no!  The _bon Dieu_ would not let her suffer that
too!  It was so terrible--everything was so terrible this night--there
could not be anything more, for it was already beyond what she could
bear.  She stretched out her hands to him imploringly.  "It--it is not
because you thought that I was Mademoiselle Bliss"--she was pleading
piteously for a denial--"that--that you--that it is because of me you
fought with Jean, and that Jean is--is--"

"Are you trying to play with me?" he rasped out savagely.  "What else
but that?  You were here all night last night.  Yes, I thought you were
Mademoiselle Bliss!  Yes, it was because of that I would have killed
Monsieur Laparde!  Is that plain enough, mademoiselle?  And now will
you answer me?  Where did you get those things, and for what hellish
reason were you wearing them?  Answer me, I tell you!"  He caught her,
and shook her violently.  "Answer me!" he fumed.

"Yes, answer him!" came a mocking voice suddenly from the archway of
the salon.

With a cry, Marie-Louise tore herself away--and, swaying, stared wildly
across the room.  It was mademoiselle!  It was Mademoiselle Bliss
standing there between the portières!

A low laugh rippled through the _atelier_--unmusically, because it held
a jarring, ominous note; and then Myrna Bliss was speaking again.

"Monsieur Vinailles told me that some girl here had made quite a _coup
de théâtre_," she said calmly--too calmly to be natural.  She fixed her
grey eyes, narrowed a little now, on Marie-Louise.  "I had no idea that
it was _you_.  How astounding!"  She swung toward Paul Valmain.  "Yes;
Monsieur Valmain, I have been listening behind the portières.  From the
hall door, when I entered the house with Monsieur Vinailles a few
moments ago, I caught sight of mademoiselle and yourself across the
salon, thanks to the half open portières; and--mademoiselle, there,
will perhaps understand this better than you--in spite of my anxiety
for Jean, I sent Monsieur Vinailles upstairs alone.  Do I make it
plain, Monsieur Valmain, that I overheard your last remarks?"

Marie-Louise glanced distractedly from one to the other.  Mademoiselle
Bliss was smiling--only it was a very strange smile.  Why was she
smiling like that?  And Monsieur Valmain's face was twitching again,
only it seemed that, where there had been anger before, there was now a
curious mingling of confusion and passionate eagerness.

"Then," he said, and took a step forward, "then--"

"Then," Myrna Bliss interrupted evenly, and came slowly across the
_atelier_, "then, of course, I understand everything, Monsieur Valmain.
And I suppose I should feel flattered that you should take it upon
yourself to avenge"--her voice was rising now, and the grey eyes were
flashing dangerously--"to avenge my honour!  How like a knight of old,
Monsieur Valmain!  How heroic!  I have heard that Monsieur Valmain is
one of the finest swordsmen in France; I have never heard that Monsieur
Laparde was an adept at the art, but that, indeed, he was almost
ignorant of it, and--"

"Mademoiselle!" he exclaimed hoarsely.  "Mademoiselle--Myrna!  You have
no right to say that!  It is not true!"  He drew himself up, clenching
his hands.  "By God, not even you shall say that to me, to Paul
Valmain!  I offered--no, I insisted that we should fight with pistols.
Laparde would not hear of it--they would make too much noise."

"Ah--a noise!" she said colourlessly.  "And what then, Monsieur
Valmain?  Have you any other excuse for what you have done?"

"You know why I did it, if you have been listening!" he cried out.
"You know why!  You know that it was because I loved you--that I love
you!  That my soul was in hell with what I believed to be true!"

It seemed to Marie-Louise that she was living through some terrible,
horrible dream.  She reached out behind her, groping for the modelling
platform, and sank down upon it.  Mademoiselle's laugh was echoing
through the room again, and there was something--something so menacing
in it that it made her shudder.

"Love!"--Myrna Bliss was quivering with passion, as she stepped
fiercely toward Paul Valmain.  "Love!  If I were a man, I would kill
you for that kind of love!  I would kill you!  You beast!  You dared to
think--to think that I had come here in the middle of the night alone,
to--to spend the night here!  You dared to think that of me!
That--that I was--"

"Myrna!  Mademoiselle!"--his hands went out to her.  His face was
ghastly white.  "Wait!  For God's sake--wait!  You do not understand!"
He whirled around and pointed to Marie-Louise.  "Look at her!  Look!
It is your cloak--your hat!  It was dark across the street.  She was
wearing your hat and cloak!"

"I heard you say all that before!" she retorted instantly.  "I do not
care what she was wearing!  I do not care what she looked like!  You
dared to think that it was me!  You dared to hold me as little better
than a woman of the streets!  You dared to do that--you despicable
hound!"  Her fingers were opening and shutting spasmodically.  "I hate
you!  I loathe you!  I would strangle you for it, if I were strong
enough!"

He shrank back from her, his lips working.

"You are merciless!" he said in a choked way.  "You--you do not
understand.  You--you do not understand what helped to make me--to--why
I came to be there last night.  It was the key of that door there, the
key of the door to the salon, the afternoon after the reception."

Myrna Bliss appeared to control herself with an effort.

"The key!"--there was well-simulated bewilderment in the quick, angry
exclamation.

"When we came in," he said hurriedly.  "Laparde, who was acting
strangely, had just unlocked the door, and he was still holding the key
in his hand without knowing it."

It was a moment before she spoke--while her eyes swept him scornfully
from head to foot.

"I wish Jean had killed you!"--her lips were just parted over her
clenched teeth.  "So--you have the temerity to add another insult to
the first!  That Jean and I were together in a locked room!  I remember
the key now.  And so Jean was acting strangely!  It was to be a little
surprise party for Jean--was it not?  Is it strange if he were
surprised then?  When he heard all of you coming, laughing and talking
and tramping up the stairs, he ran to the door to open it, and I
remember now that the key fell out of the lock and to the floor, and
that he picked it up.  How amazing that perhaps he held it in his hand,
Monsieur Valmain!  And do you imagine, Monsieur Valmain, that it was an
opportune time for me, who not only knew you were coming, but who had
arranged the affair, to indulge in the amours that your vilely fertile
mind--"

"Stop, mademoiselle!" he cried wildly.  "I was mad--mad with my love
for you.  I understand too well now!  I understood that I had made a
terrible mistake, _misérable_ that I am, when this girl, when it was
too late, came out of that dressing room there, when--when Laparde had
fallen.  I am a fool, a blind, senseless fool; but--but, mademoiselle,
it was my love--you will forgive, you--"

"Besides a fool, you are a coward!" she said pitilessly.  "But you do
not understand everything yet--and you shall have no further chance to
warp and twist things to suit your perverted fancy, Monsieur Valmain.
I think I could quite easily tell you where this girl, in whom you
imagine you have discovered Jean's model, obtained those clothes--and
if she will not tell you, I will.  And then you will leave here, and
you will take pains, Monsieur Valmain, that we do not meet again.  Do
you hear that?  I tell you again that I hate you, that I loathe you,
and that if I were a man I would know how to make you answer for it!"
She stepped quickly to Marie-Louise's side.  "Look up at me!" she
ordered curtly.  "This man says that hat and cloak are mine, and it is
true--they were mine.  Tell him where you got them!"

Marie-Louise did not move, except that she clasped her hands together a
little more tightly in her lap.  She could not tell; for suddenly she
thought of Father Anton, and a sense of loyalty to Father Anton
insisted that she should not tell.  If mademoiselle knew, as
mademoiselle said, that was another matter, and she could not change
that now; but to tell it herself--no, she could not do that, for that
was to admit that the good curé was in the secret of her presence in
Paris, and after that it would be known almost surely that he had
arranged with Hector and Madame Mi-mi for her to come there to the
_atelier_.

"Well?" prompted Myrna Bliss, sharply.

Marie-Louise shook her head.

Myrna Bliss stamped her foot angrily.

"Are you stupid enough to imagine that you are protecting Father Anton?
I promise you I shall have a word with that gentleman in the morning!
And since you could have got that hat and cloak nowhere else, tell
Monsieur Valmain that Father Anton gave them to you, and have done with
it!"

Marie-Louise looked up.  Mademoiselle had said it, and--and Father
Anton certainly would not deny it.

"Yes," she said under her breath.  "Father Anton gave them to me."

"Well, why didn't you say so at first?" snapped Myrna.  She turned
again furiously on Paul Valmain.  "You hear, Monsieur Valmain!  You are
well acquainted with Father Anton.  Go to him, if you have any doubts.
You have only to know now how Father Anton obtained them"--her words
were curling, biting, stinging like a whiplash in their bitter scorn.
"Well, listen!  I and a few of my friends have become _charitable_
since father established his fund.  It is contagious, Monsieur Valmain!
We, too, give bounteously to Father Anton for distribution amongst the
poor--we give our discarded garments!  I sent him that hat and cloak in
a bundle with some other things, a few days ago.  Is it quite plain,
Monsieur Valmain?  Are you satisfied?  Well, then"--she swung an
outstretched arm toward the door--"go!"

"But, mademoiselle--_pour l'amour de Dieu_!" he protested brokenly.
"Do you not see that I am in agony, in torment for what I have done,
that--"

"Go!" she raged--and stamped with her foot upon the floor again.

For a moment he stood lurching a little on his feet, as though he had
been struck a blow; and then, white-faced, he drew himself up and bowed
to her.

"As you will, mademoiselle!" he said in a low voice, and walked past
her toward the door.

Myrna Bliss turned to watch him--and halfway across the room halted him.

"Wait!"--she pointed to the rapiers lying on the floor.  "Take those
things with you!  And one word more, Monsieur Valmain!  I do not intend
to pose in Paris in the abandoned rôle you were so quick to cast me
for.  You perhaps understand that!  I do not propose that anything
shall be known of what has happened here to-night.  I shall see to it
that nothing is said by the others, but a word of this from you,
Monsieur Valmain, or from Monsieur LeFair, who Monsieur Vinailles tells
me was acting as your second, and--"

"Mademoiselle might have spared me that!" he said monotonously--and,
picking up the rapiers, walked on through the salon and out into the
hall.

In a sort of miserably fascinated way Marie-Louise had followed him
with her eyes.  She heard the outer door close behind him--and then
mechanically she rose to her feet, as Myrna Bliss came and stood before
her.

"So"--Myrna's voice was quivering, tense with passion--"so it remained
for Monsieur Valmain to discover the secret of the wonderful,
beautiful, entrancing model!  Monsieur Valmain is right, of course.  I
knew it at once, the moment I heard him say so.  I was not very clever,
I suppose, or I should have seen it for myself long ago; only--you
quite understand this of course--I had forgotten, utterly forgotten,
that you even existed!  But it seems that Jean could not live without
his little peasant; nor the little peasant without Jean!  It is
perfectly comprehensible now why there should have been such secrecy
about his model.  And so you have been living with Jean, have you, ever
since he came to Paris?  The naïve, innocent little _ingénue_ of
Bernay-sur-Mer!"

And then Marie-Louise lifted her head high again, and, while the hot
flushes came and swept her face, the great dark eyes held steadily on
the grey ones that were hard and cold like steel.  It was not
mademoiselle of the _grand monde_ before her any more; it was a woman
whose tongue was making a sacrilege of all that was holy and cherished
in her life, making a hideous mockery of her love that was so sacred
and pure to her, making it a foul thing, smirching it, defiling it--it
was not Mademoiselle Bliss of another world than hers whom she
approached with diffidence and awe; it was a woman taunting her with a
shame from which her soul recoiled, and there came surging upon her,
born of the primitive, elemental life that had been hers, the days upon
the oars, the nights of rugged battling with the storms, a fury that
was physical in its cry for expression.

"It is not true!  It is not true!" she panted--and, her hands clenched
tightly, raised as though to strike, she took a quick step forward.

Startled, Myrna Bliss involuntarily sprang back--but the next instant
she was laughing threateningly.

"You little spitfire!" she exclaimed angrily.  "And so it is not true!
Look at that statue behind you, look at any in this room, at any Jean
has ever done since he has been in Paris, and--oh, yes, I see it quite
plainly myself, now that I have been shown--it is you, you everywhere!
And you have the brazenness, the impudence to say that you have not
been living with Jean, that you have not been coming here at all hours
of the night for the last two years--as you have to-night--as you did
last night!  Bah, you pitiful little hypocrite, would any one believe
you?"

"Yes, they would believe me!" Marie-Louise cried passionately.  "And
_you_ will believe me!  I will make you believe me!  I will make you!
I will make you!  I--"  Her voice broke suddenly, and with a half sob
she dropped her hands to her sides.  Her fury had gone and in its place
had come only a desperate earnestness to make mademoiselle believe.
She had been thinking of herself alone--and there was Jean!  If
mademoiselle would not believe her, the shame would be Jean's too, and
the guilt that mademoiselle imagined would be Jean's guilt too.  And
even if she must tell all about Father Anton bringing her to Hector and
Madame Mi-mi, she must make mademoiselle believe.  "Mademoiselle"--she
was pleading now, her voice choking as she spoke--"mademoiselle,
see--listen!  You must--you must believe!  It is true, every word I
have said is true!  And it is true that I love Jean, and that that is
why I came, but--but Jean has never seen me since that day he left
Bernay-sur-Mer.  See, mademoiselle--listen!  It is only a few days
since I came to Paris--see, mademoiselle, even this hat and cloak
proves it.  I did not know that it was cold, that one needed such
things in Paris, and I had nothing except just the clothes I had worn
in Bernay-sur-Mer, and the night I came I went to Father Anton and he
gave the hat and cloak to me--but I did not know, mademoiselle, that
they had been yours.  I wanted to see Jean again, not to let him know
that I was here, but only to see him, only to see his work.  It was two
years, mademoiselle, two years--and Father Anton understood, only he
made me promise, mademoiselle, that I would not speak to Jean, that I
would not let Jean know that I was here.  Listen--listen,
mademoiselle!"  Marie-Louise's hands were raised again--but
entreatingly now.  "It was only to see Jean again, and see his work,
and then I was going away.  For nothing, for nothing in the world would
I let Jean know that I had come.  And so--and so, mademoiselle, so
Father Anton arranged with Hector that I should do the work about the
salon and the _atelier_, but very early in the mornings before Jean was
up; and then because I came so early Hector gave me the key--and last
night--oh, mademoiselle, mademoiselle, can you not understand?--I came
here, and--and I came again to-night.  See, mademoiselle--it is so easy
to believe!  You do believe!  Father Anton will tell you that it is all
true, and that I have been in Bernay-sur-Mer all this time.
Mademoiselle, mademoiselle--you do believe!"

Myrna Bliss was staring at Marie-Louise in startled amazement.

"You mean--you mean," she said, in a low, tense way; "you mean that
Jean knows nothing of this--that he does not know that you are even in
Paris, that he has not seen you since he left Bernay-sur-Mer?"

"But, yes; yes, yes, yes, mademoiselle, it is so, all that--it is so!"
Marie-Louise answered feverishly.  "And--and he must not know now,
mademoiselle--he must not know now."

And then Myrna Bliss smiled ironically.

"I will see to that!" she said grimly.  "You need have no fear on that
score, if what you say is true!"  She turned abruptly from
Marie-Louise, walked straight to the "_Fille du Régiment_," and gazed
at it for a moment.  Then, scarcely aloud: "'The womanhood of France,'
he had said ... 'The model in his heart.'"  And so Jean did not know!
Well, if that were so, she would take very good care that he never did
know!  It seemed incredible, but the girl's sincerity was not to be
denied.  She laughed out sharply, and wheeled back upon Marie-Louise.
"Well, and what now?" she said coldly; and then, thrusting quickly:
"Are you aware that I am to marry Monsieur Laparde?"

Marie-Louise's face blanched.

"Yes," she said faintly.

"And so"--the scathing tones were back in Myrna's voice--"and so you
were just playing with fire!  Well, are you satisfied with what you
have done?  If Jean Laparde lives it will be no thanks to you; if he
dies it will be you who--"

Marie-Louise put out her hands as though to ward off a blow.  She was
swaying upon her feet.

"Not that--not that, mademoiselle!"--she could scarcely force the words
to her lips.  "Do not say it, mademoiselle!  I know that it is
true--God in his infinite pity, have pity on me!--but do not say it!  I
will go away, mademoiselle--I will go away--for always.  I will wait
only to know that--that Jean is well, for the _bon Dieu_ will not let
him die--and then--and then I will go--and then I--"  A great sob shook
her frame, and covering her face with her hands she sank down again
upon the modelling platform.

She was conscious that Mademoiselle Bliss was standing there, that the
grey eyes were fixed upon her; and then that from the salon some one
called to mademoiselle--but she did not hear mademoiselle go, only when
she looked up again she was alone in the atelier.  And it was very kind
of mademoiselle to go so softly, and to say no more.

She rose slowly to her feet, and passed through the atelier, and
through the salon, and out into the hall, and to the stairs--and paused
there to listen with pitiful eagerness.  But there was no sound from
above--there was only the voice of her soul that kept whispering so
cruelly, "it is you ... it is you ... it is you ... it is not Paul
Valmain who has done this ... it is you ... it is you."

And there at the foot of the stairs she knelt down for a moment; then
rose, and crossed the hall slowly to the door, and opened it--and
walked blindly out.




-- VIII --

FLIGHT

Madame Garneau's hair straggled untidily about her head, her hands were
red, calloused, inclined indeed to be grimy, she had passed even that
poets'-consolation-prize age of forty, and she had no figure; but
Madame Garneau was possessed of a heart.  She pushed open the door of
Marie-Louise's room, and dangled in her hand a yellow paper bag that
was grease specked on the bottom.

"_Voilà_, my little lodger!" she cried gaily.  "I have this for you,
and you will never guess what it is; and, besides, I have something
else--a message for you from Father Anton.  Now which will you have
first?"

Marie-Louise, from her chair by the window, rose quickly to her feet,
with a little exclamation of pleased surprise.

Madame Garneau immediately pushed her back into the chair.

"But you are to remain quiet--eh, _ma petite_!"  She wagged her finger
severely in front of Marie-Louise's nose.  "Now sit still, or you shall
have neither one nor the other!"

"What nonsense!" laughed Marie-Louise, as she stood up once more.  "I
am quite well again--and I am even to go out this morning."

The paper bag banged belligerently on Madame Garneau's hip, as she
placed her arms akimbo.

"You are to go out!  And who said you are to go out?"

"But, who else--the doctor," Marie-Louise answered with a smile.

"Ah, the doctor!" sniffed Madame Garneau disdainfully.  "I have my
opinion of doctors!  In two or three days it will be time enough!"  She
wagged her forefinger again, and held up the bag.  "Eh, _bien_--can you
guess?"

"Never!" admitted Marie-Louise, shaking her head prettily.

"Cream-puffs!" announced Madame Garneau triumphantly.  It was perhaps
the most indigestible edible with which she could have outraged a diet
list, but in that quarter of Paris, where _sous_ were scarce,
cream-puffs were the delicacy _par excellence_, and therefore a
delicacy for all occasions, rare enough in any event, when they could
be obtained.  And besides, as Madame Garneau had said, she had her
opinion of doctors--Madame Garneau, even if unconsciously so, was
consistent!  "Cream-puffs, _ma petite_!  From the _patisserie_ around
the corner--I sent the gamin, who brought the message from Father
Anton, for them.  And now what do you say?"

Marie-Louise had neither heart nor appetite for cream-puffs, but she
must needs peek excitedly in through the top of the bag, and thank
Madame Garneau effusively, while she protested earnestly at the
extravagance.

"It is nothing!" declared Madame Garneau, her honest face flushed with
pleasure.  She placed the bag on the foot of the bed.  "It is
nothing--_ma foi_!  And now about Father Anton.  He was to have come
this afternoon, eh?"

"Yes," said Marie-Louise.

"Well, then," said Madame Garneau, "he is not coming."

"Not coming!"

"It is his poor!" Madame Garneau exclaimed tartly.  "Your Father Anton
has no sense!  I would teach him a lesson if I had anything to do with
him!  Fancy!  The idea!  And at his age!  He will kill himself!  The
gamin's mother was sick, and Father Anton must sit up the night, and
stay there all this day!  And it is not once, but all the time he does
that!  Bah, I have no patience with him!  His heart is too soft!  It is
well for his poor that I am not Father Anton!"  There was finality in
the shrug of Madame Garneau's shoulders.  She glanced at Marie-Louise,
and then her eyes fell upon the paper bag.  "Oh, I forgot to tell you!"
she said anxiously.  "There is a cream-puff gone from the
quarter-dozen.  I gave one to the gamin, he made such eyes at the bag."
She tucked in a refractory wisp of hair that was straying over her ear.
"Well, then, as I was saying, he is not coming this afternoon, but he
will come this evening; and he said you were not to worry at all,
because what he was talking to you about yesterday--whatever that
is!--is all arranged."

All arranged!  It came as a sudden shock.  Marie-Louise turned her head
quickly away, and, with her back to Madame Garneau, stood looking out
of the window.  All arranged!  Then what should she do--what should she
do?  She put her hands wearily to her eyes.

"_Mais, là, là_!" soothed Madame Garneau.  "You must not be
disappointed.  It is only for a few hours.  He will come this evening."

Marie-Louise forced a laugh.

"But I am not disappointed," she answered.  "I do not mind at all."
She was still staring down into the street.  If Madame Garneau would
only go so that she could think what to do, and--no!  She knew what she
must do, she had thought it all out before; it was only that the moment
when she must act upon her decision was thrust so suddenly upon her.
"Oh, Madame Garneau, I was almost forgetting!" she cried--and, turning
from the window, ran to the dilapidated and wobbly bureau, pulled open
a drawer, and took out her purse.  "It is a week since I have paid for
my room--a week to-day, isn't it?"

Madame Garneau promptly retreated toward the door.

"_Mais, non_!  _Mais, non_!" she protested.  "When one is sick, one
does not earn the _sous_!  Next week, the week after, when you are at
work again, you shall--"

Marie-Louise laughingly caught Madame Garneau's hand, and began to
count the franc pieces into it; while Madame Garneau, still protesting,
kept up her retreat for the door.

"There!"--Marie-Louise triumphantly closed the other's fingers over the
money.

"But, no!" Madame Garneau expostulated vigorously.  "But I will not
hear of it!  What do you imagine!  I--"

And then Marie-Louise pushed the other playfully through the door, and
closed the door, and placed her back against it, and laughed as she
heard Madame Garneau grumbling outside and finally go grumbling
away--but the laugh was all for Madame Garneau.  When she could no
longer hear Madame Garneau, she clasped her hands tightly to her bosom,
and caught her breath.  That was done!  She had both paid and got
Madame Garneau from the room.

She stood still by the door, her shoulders drooped; her hands dropped
to her sides, and her fingers began to pluck nervously at the folds of
her dress, as she stared unseeingly before her.  Father Anton had it
all arranged--the words brought so much, meant so much, and seemed to
embody in themselves all that had happened in the week that had passed
since the night when Jean and Monsieur Valmain had fought in the
studio.  She had wandered blindly and like one dazed all the rest of
that night through the streets of Paris; and it must only have been the
_bon Dieu_ who had led her at last to where, lying unconscious on the
floor outside the door of his room, Father Anton had found her in the
morning.  And then--how good they had all been to her!--Father Anton,
and Madame Garneau, and Doctor Maurier, the grey-haired, kindly doctor
who had been with Jean that night, and who would take not a _sou_ for
his visits to her, but only fill the room with sunshine through his
good news of Jean.

She remembered that she had asked Father Anton for Jean's doctor
because then she would always have word of Jean--and she remembered
Father Anton's dismay at the request.  "But, Marie-Louise," Father
Anton had said anxiously, "you do not know what you are asking!  He is
the most famous man in Paris, and--"  "And he will come," she had told
Father Anton.  And she had been right, for Doctor Maurier had come; and
so each day she had had news of Jean, and now Jean was so well that he
was walking about the studio again.

But most of all how good Father Anton had been!  She had told him
all--everything--and he had not been angry with her; though she knew,
from little things he had said inadvertently, that Mademoiselle Bliss
had been very angry with him.  Dear old Father Anton!  He had tried to
take all the blame upon himself, because he said he had been
deceitful--though she could not understand that, no matter how hard he
tried to make her believe it, for he had only helped her to see Jean
and to be near Jean, and that was what she herself had pleaded with him
to do.

And then, as she had grown stronger and had begun to talk of going
away, Father Anton had agreed with her, but he had insisted that she
should go back to Bernay-sur-Mer.  And he had become so earnest and
determined that it must be Bernay-sur-Mer, and because she knew that it
was his love for her that made him so anxious about her future, she
could not bring herself to tell him what she really meant to do, what,
in the long hours through the nights as she had lain awake, she had
made up her mind to do--to go somewhere, she did not know where, but
somewhere far away where there would be nothing to remind her of
Jean--not that she could forget, no matter where she went, but that
scenes and associations, as they had done in the past two years, might
not again prove too strong for her.  And so, rather than pain Father
Anton by an absolute refusal, or the admission that even he was to go
out of her life, she had told him only that she did not want to go back
to Bernay-sur-Mer, that her house was sold, and that every one there
would think it very strange that she had gone away like that only to
return again so soon.

But he was not to be shaken in his determination.  "Ah, even if that
were true," Father Anton had said to her only yesterday, "nevertheless,
my little Marie-Louise, it is the thing you must do.  I cannot let you
do anything else; and in a little while--who knows!--you will be very
happy there again.  But it is not true, for there is a way that I have
been thinking about as I came here.  As for the house, it is as well
that it is sold; you have the money, and besides it is much better that
you should not live there alone--you will live for a while with those
honest Fregeaus, who will be overjoyed.  And as for the rest--see,
Marie-Louise, this is what we will do!  I will speak to Monsieur Bliss
and tell him that I wish to go back for a little visit, and we will go
together--and the good people of Bernay-sur-Mer will not think it
strange at all then, for I will tell them that you have been with me
here in Paris, and that it is I who have persuaded you that it is best
for you to go back and live in Bernay-sur-Mer.  _Tiens_, could anything
be better?  And I will speak to Monsieur Bliss at once."

She knew quite well what was in Father Anton's mind.  If she were in
Bernay-sur-Mer he would feel that she was quite safe, that no harm
could come to her; and he had mentioned, so innocently as he believed,
Amidé Dubois once or twice, and he was perhaps imagining that some day
she would marry there.  But he did not understand!  She shook her head
slowly; and then, suddenly rousing herself, she walked across the room
to the little bureau, and took out her things, and laid them upon the
bed, and began to make them up into a little bundle--the same bundle
she had carried with her from Bernay-sur-Mer.  He did not understand!

It was all arranged!  Father Anton had seen Monsieur Bliss then--and
perhaps it would be to-morrow, or maybe even to-night that Father Anton
would want her to go with him.  But she could not go back to
Bernay-sur-Mer!  For nothing in the world would she go back there!  If
there were no other reasons, there was one that alone made it
impossible--some day Jean might return there himself for a visit.  And
she must go somewhere where there was no possibility that she and Jean
should ever see each other--and she must go now while she had the
chance.  There was nothing to keep her any longer; she was quite well
and strong again, and she knew that Jean was getting well, and--and she
had seen Jean and his work, and she could picture his splendid life
stretching out before him in which even his marriage with Mademoiselle
Bliss, who was very rich and of the _grand monde_, would help to make
him even greater, and--and so there remained nothing more to hold her
there.  It was very wonderful that it should be her lips that Jean had
fashioned--unconsciously, as Father Anton said--into his clay.  It was
very wonderful!  It was something that the _bon Dieu_ had given her to
make her glad; to make the sadness and remorse for the tragedy she had
brought about less terrible; to make her know that, after all, her
share in Jean's career had not just ended with that day, so long ago in
Bernay-sur-Mer, when she had given him to France.

She tied the bundle neatly.  She was ready to go now, and she picked it
up, took a step toward the door--and, holding the bundle in her hand,
paused hesitantly.  She could not go like that--Father Anton would be
in a state of frenzy over her.  She--she could write him a little note.
Yes; she would do that.  She set the bundle down, and hurriedly untied
it.  She remembered that when she had written down Father Anton's
address before leaving Bernay-sur-Mer she had put the pencil in the
pocket of her apron.  Yes; here it was, but--she looked around her in
sudden anxiety--there was nothing, no paper to write on.  Her eyes
rested upon the bed.  Madame Garneau's cream-puffs!  She picked up the
bag, tore a piece from it, and, taking it to the window sill, wrote a
few hurried sentences.  It was just to say that she could never go to
Bernay-sur-Mer; just to say that she was going away, very far away
somewhere, and that he must not be sad about her, or try to find her
for she did not know where she was going herself; just to say that she
loved him, and that he had been so good, so very, very good to her, and
that she would pray always to the _bon Dieu_ for him.

There was a mist in her eyes as she folded the yellow, grease-spotted
paper--she could buy an envelope and a stamp and mail it to Father
Anton.  She took up her bundle again, and went to the door; and, making
sure that Madame Garneau was not in sight, hurried out of the house to
the street.  Here, she ran until she had turned the first corner and
could no longer be seen from the house, then walked quietly along.

Blocks away, she stepped into a little store.

"Monsieur," she said to the man who served her with her envelope and
stamp, "monsieur, will you be kind enough to tell me the way to the
railway station?"

"To which one, mademoiselle?" he inquired politely.  "The _Gare de
l'Est, the Gare du Nord, the Gare St. Lazare_, the--"

She had not thought that there might be more than one, but one would
take her away equally as well as another--it made no difference.  Only
he would think it very strange that she did not know which one she
wanted.

"The _Gare St. Lazare_, if you please, monsieur," she ventured
quickly--and thanked him when he had told her, and went out on the
street again.




--IX--

MYRNA'S STRATEGY

"Two months--three months in America!  And to be married there!"
ejaculated Henry Bliss, as he stared at his daughter in utter
bewilderment.

Myrna, from the depths of her father's favourite lounging chair, which
she had appropriated on entering the library after dinner that evening,
nodded her head in a quite matter-of-fact way.

"Isn't this rather--rather sudden?" inquired Henry Bliss, mustering a
facetious irony to his rescue.

"Oh, no!" said Myrna demurely.  "I decided upon it almost a week ago."

"Oh, you did!"--a wry smile flickered on her father's lips.  "A week
ago, eh?  And what does Jean say?"

"Jean doesn't say anything," replied Myrna complacently.  "He doesn't
know anything about it--it wasn't necessary until the time came.  I
haven't said anything to any one--until now."

"Well, upon my soul!" exclaimed her father.  "You are beginning early
with your future husband, Myrna!  So then, we are both to be twisted
around your finger--eh?  I shall have to speak to Jean--warn him.  For
myself, of course, it's quite hopeless, I've given it up years ago; but
as for Jean, that's quite another matter--it's all in starting right,
with a firm hand, you know!"  His eyes twinkled.  "I'll have a little
confidential talk with Jean."

"Don't be ridiculous, father!" she laughed.  She rose from her chair.
"Well, that's settled; and now I--"

"Eh--what?  Settled!  Nothing is settled!  What's settled?" he
spluttered anxiously.

"That we are going to America, of course," said Myrna sweetly.  "You,
and Jean, and I."

"Now, see here, Myrna," protested her father, with what he meant for
severity, "a trip to America is all very well, but it isn't the sort of
thing one decides on the spur of the moment."

"Of course it isn't!"--Myrna's eyebrows went up archly.  "Didn't I tell
you that I have been arranging it for a whole week?  I was only waiting
for cable replies to some of my letters before speaking to you, and--"

"And of course as you have not overlooked minor details, I suppose we
sail sometime next week!" her father interrupted with mild sarcasm.

"No," said Myrna placidly.  "From Havre, the day after to-morrow, by
the _Lorraine_."

Henry Bliss sat down weakly in a chair.  He removed his cigar from his
lips, and made one or two helpless passes with it in the air.

"Impossible!" he finally exploded.  "Absolutely impossible!  Utterly
out of the question!"

"I don't see why," observed Myrna, quite undisturbed.

"You don't see why?  No, of course, you don't see why"--Henry Bliss was
still waving his cigar.  "Well, I can't run away at a moment's notice,
can I?  Good heavens!  The day after to-morrow!  There's a thousand and
one affairs that would have to be attended to before I could even think
of it!"

"Which, of course, isn't true at all"--Myrna's laugh rippled merrily
through the room.  "There are perhaps a dozen social engagements, and
two or three other affairs for which you will have to send 'regrets,'
and"--she perched herself cosily on the arm of her father's chair--"and
your secretary will do that for you.  In fact, I told him he was to do
it to-morrow morning."

"You--_what_?  Well, I'll be damned!" gasped Henry Bliss.

"Father!"

"Well, it was excusable!" muttered Henry Bliss.  "I--I am half inclined
to repeat it."

Myrna's arm slipped around her father's neck.  He was quite manageable,
of course--but still he had to be managed.  For, if what had come
within so narrow a margin of being a tragedy with a fatal ending had
forced her hand and forced the inevitable, as it were, upon her, she
could at least see to it that the adjustment of the new order of things
was of her own arranging.  It was inevitable that she would marry Jean,
she had decided that long ago; it was only the "day" itself which,
until all this had introduced a new factor into her plans, had been at
all vague in her mind.  But with Paul Valmain eliminated, and her
quarrel with Jean made up as he had lain there dangerously hurt that
night of the duel, everything had taken on a totally different aspect.
Perhaps she had yielded a little weakly under sick-bed influences, but
however that might be, she was now Jean's fiancée, though it was not
publicly announced; as, coming upon the heels of Jean's mysterious
accident and Paul Valmain's sudden departure from Paris, it would to a
certainty have caused talk and gossip, which for very good reasons she
was most anxious to avoid; for, a wheel within a wheel, if talk went
too far the truth might come out, and the truth at all hazards was the
one thing that Jean must not know.  This was one reason why, almost
from the moment that she had grasped the situation that night in Jean's
studio, she had determined to get Jean away from Paris the instant he
was able to go.  But there was a still stronger and more potent reason.
The marriage of Jean Laparde, the world-famous sculptor, and Myrna
Bliss, heiress to millions, a society leader in both Paris and New
York, was not an affair to be consummated in a moment, nor to have its
preparations go unmarked.  It would be the most brilliant function that
society had ever known on either side of the water--to that she had
quite definitely made up her mind!  But all that would take time; and
meanwhile, more to be feared than any talk, was the possibility of Jean
seeing Marie-Louise--and the possibility, or rather, perhaps, the
opportunity that would be afforded to Marie-Louise herself, whom she,
Myrna, was by no means inclined to trust!  She was quite convinced that
Jean had not seen the girl since he had left Bernay-sur-Mer, that to a
certain extent the girl had told the truth, but that made it all the
more imperative that he should not see her now; for if, though
unconsciously so, Marie-Louise was so intimate a part of his life that
the girl took form constantly in his work, it would be, to put it
mildly, just as well if they did not meet--until after Jean was
married.  After that--well, after that, she was quite capable of
looking after a _husband_!  In the meantime she would take good care
that the possibility of such a contretemps was entirely obviated by
going to America, spending the few months necessary for the marriage
preparations there, months in which Jean would be the recipient of even
greater honours than Paris had accorded him, be married, and--well,
that was all!  It was very simple!  What this impertinent little
peasant girl had attempted once, even if Father Anton did intend to
take her back to Bernay-sur-Mer, she was quite capable of attempting
again--if she had the chance!

Myrna nestled her arm snugly around her father's neck, and held up two
daintily extended fingers before his eyes.

"Now, listen, father," she said, puckering up her forehead prettily.
"Now I am going to be very serious.  There are two very good reasons
why we will go.  First, now that Jean is able to be up again, a sea
trip is the one thing above all others that he needs.  Doctor Maurier
prescribes it."

"Insists on it, I suppose!" observed Henry Bliss dryly.

"He will," said Myrna, laughing, "if I ask him to."

"H'm!" commented Henry Bliss, the wrinkles around his eyes beginning to
nest into a smile.  "Well--and the other reason?"

"The other one," said Myrna, and laid her head down against her
father's cheek; "the other one is--I must whisper it--now, listen--is
because I've set my heart on it, and I want to go."

"Which settles it!" groaned Henry Bliss, with mock lugubriousness.
"Well"--he got up from his chair, and brushed vigorously at the cigar
ash which, incident to Myrna's embrace, bedecked his waistcoat--"well,
I'll see what Jean says about it."

"Why, of course!" agreed Myrna innocently.  "It all depends upon Jean.
We'll leave it that way, father."

Henry Bliss looked at her, gasped once--and grinned in spite of himself.

"There isn't any other trifling matter you'd like to call my attention
to this evening, is there?" he hazarded, pinching his daughter's cheek
playfully.  "Because, if there is, I'm--"  He paused, as a footman
coughed discreetly from the doorway.  "Well?" he demanded.

"It is Monsieur le Curé, Monsieur Bliss," said the man.

"Show him in," instructed Henry Bliss--and, as the man retired, glanced
quickly at his daughter.  "I hope, Myrna, that--"

"That we've made up our differences!" she supplied, with sudden
impatience.  "That I quite understand that the gentle old soul in an
endeavour to set the world right meant well, and was actuated by the
loftiest of motives!  Oh, yes, I think Father Anton and I understand
each other perfectly, and--"

"Monsieur le Curé!" announced the footman.

Myrna calmly turned her back--but only to whirl suddenly around again,
as, with a sharp exclamation, her father stepped quickly toward the
door.

"Good heavens, my dear man, what is the matter with you?" Henry Bliss
cried out in consternation.

Father Anton's white hair was unbrushed; he was unshaved; and his face
already haggard, his eyes already deep-set and blue-circled from his
twenty-four hours of bedside vigil, now bore added and unmistakable
signs of violent mental agitation and distraction.  His hand, that held
a piece of torn yellow paper, trembled as though with the ague.

"Ah, Monsieur Bliss--ah, _pardon_, mademoiselle!" he stammered, and
attempted a bow.  "I--I have run very fast--and--I--I--"

"Is anything the matter?" inquired Myrna coolly, joining the two at the
door.

Father Anton looked at her piteously.

"She is gone!" he said, his lips quivering.

"Gone!" repeated Henry Bliss bewilderedly.  "Who is gone?"

"Our charming little Marie-Louise of Bernay-sur-Mer, of course!  Who
else?"--Myrna laughed sharply.  "Well, _mon cher_ Monsieur le Curé,
will you tell us how it happened?  I had an idea you were very shortly
to return with her to Bernay-sur-Mer.  It seems I was mistaken!"

"But I do not know how it happened!"--Father Anton shook his head
distractedly.  "I was away last night and to-day.  This evening when I
returned to my rooms I found this letter from her"--he stared at the
torn yellow paper in his hand, and the tears began to well into his
eyes.  "She said that she was going away--that she could not go back to
Bernay-sur-Mer--that I was not to look for her--that she did not know
where she was going herself.  I waited for nothing.  I ran at once to
Madame Garneau's.  Madame Garneau had seen nothing of Marie-Louise
since this morning.  We looked in Marie-Louise's room.  Her clothes
were gone.  And then--and then I ran here to get help to find her."

"And so," said Myrna icily, "are we never to hear the last of her?  The
trouble in the first place is of your own making, Father Anton--it is
unfortunate that others have to suffer for it!  Well, what does it
mean?  She did not want to go back to Bernay-sur-Mer--she has run away
from you--from everybody that could keep track of her.  Why?  That she
can go to Jean again without being found out?"  She shrugged her
shoulders.  "However, under the circumstances, if that is so, it will
do her little good, since Jean himself is going away to--"

"No, no!" Father Anton cried out brokenly.  "You do not know
Marie-Louise!  You do not know Marie-Louise to say that!  She, more
than any one else, would not let Jean know.  It is because her heart is
broken that she has gone.  And it is true, I am to blame."  The tears
were running down his cheeks; he held out his hands to them
imploringly.  "She is not well--she is only just recovered from her
illness, my little Marie-Louise, and--and--" the words died away in a
sort of frightened sob, at a quick, warning touch upon his arm from
Myrna.

Steps came running across the hall--and the next moment Jean himself
was standing in the doorway.

"_Tiens_!" he cried out gaily.  "It is the first time I have left the
studio.  I would not let the man announce me.  _Me voici_!  Here I am!
It is a surprise--eh?  But--eh!--what is the matter?"  He stared at the
three--at Henry Bliss, who was evidencing palpable confusion; at Myrna,
who seemed suddenly to have lost her colour; at Father Anton, who had
tears trickling down his face, and acted as though he were gazing at a
ghost.

"It--it is Jean!" faltered Father Anton nervously, the letter
fluttering from his hand to the floor.

"But, yes, of course, it is Jean!  Who else?"  Jean laughed--and
stepped forward mechanically to pick up the paper.  "Permit me.  I--"

A dainty satin-slippered toe was covering the letter.  Myrna was
smiling reprovingly.

"It is quite time enough for you to be gallant, Jean, when you can do
so without the danger of reopening your wound!" she said sweetly.
"Have you not been told often enough that you are not to stoop down
like that?  Father Anton is much better able than you to pick it up!"

"Yes, yes," said Father Anton hurriedly, reaching for the paper and
tucking it into the breast of his _soutane_.  "Yes, you--you must be
careful of yourself, Jean."

"Nonsense!" declared Jean.  "I am perfectly recovered!"  He stared at
the three in turn again for a moment.  "But--but perhaps I am
intruding--_de trop_?"

"Not at all!" Myrna answered composedly.  "It is a matter that concerns
only father and Monsieur le Curé; and they"--she glanced brightly at
her father--"I am sure, will be only too glad to get away to father's
den where they can discuss it by themselves."

"Yes--er--yes, of course," coughed Henry Bliss.  "It's--er--good to see
you out again, Jean, my boy."  Then jocularly, in an attempt to
disguise his self-consciousness: "Come along, Father Anton"--he caught
the other's arm, and led the curé out of the room--"there are perhaps
others who prefer to be by themselves."

A slightly puzzled expression on his face, Jean watched them out of
sight across the hall; then turned inquiringly to Myrna.

Myrna's shoulders lifted daintily.

"If it isn't one thing, it's another," she said, as though the subject
bored her.  "There has always been something or other ever since father
started that fund of his; and the curé trots to father with everything.
This time, it seems that one of Father Anton's protégées has run away
from him; and, as you saw, the curé is beside himself."  Again the
shoulders lifted "But you, Jean"--infusing a sudden note of perturbed
anxiety into her voice--"are you sure you were wise in coming out
to-night?  What brought you?"

And then Jean threw back his head, and laughed, and closed the
door--and caught her in his arms.

"_Mon Dieu_!" he cried, holding her close to him, and trying to kiss
the suddenly averted face.  "Do you ask what brought me?  Well, then, I
will tell you!  Did you not say that you would come this afternoon, and
did you not promise that we would settle about our marriage?  And you
did not come, and all the afternoon I was waiting, and now"--his face
fell a little, as she slipped away from him--"and now that I am here
you run away from me."

"You are too impulsive, Jean!  You are destruction on gowns!" she
laughed, and backed merrily away from him to sink down gracefully in a
chair.

"Gowns!" he echoed, a sudden flush of anger coming to his cheeks, as he
followed her.  "What does it matter, a gown, when--"

"Now, don't be cross!" she commanded teasingly; and, gaily regal,
extended her hand.  "See, here is my hand to kiss."

He hesitated; and then, as, a little sullenly, he bent and touched her
fingers with his lips, she laughed again.  She loved to excite and
watch moods in Jean--as now for instance, when the tall, strong figure
was drawn up haughtily, and the emotions, that he would never learn to
hide, were so apparent in his face, as he bit his lips and pulled at
his short, pointed beard.  Jean was as readable as a book at all times,
and always would be--which was not a bad trait for a husband to
possess!  And this was Jean Laparde, the man of genius, unquestionably
at that moment the most famous man in France!  She smiled at him
through half veiled eyes.  To be Madame Laparde!  Socially, it meant an
incomparable triumph; intimately, it meant--well, at least, it was
obvious enough that the marriage need hold no terror of tyranny in
store for her!  Jean, for all his greatness, and save for his
occasional passionate outbursts, was as plastic as his own clay.  Her
eyelids lifted, and in the grey eyes was laughter.

"Well, and why the brown study?  What are you thinking about?" she
demanded pertly.

"I was thinking of Paul Valmain," he answered abruptly.

"Paul Valmain!" she repeated--and sat suddenly upright in her chair.

"Yes," said Jean, a little bitterly.  "That he would have small reason
to be jealous, even now that we are engaged."

"Don't be absurd!" she retorted sharply.

Jean shrugged his shoulders.

"And speaking of Paul Valmain," he went on, a menacing note creeping
into his tones, "I have been talking to Hector again this afternoon
about that night--the night that Valmain said he saw you enter the
house."

She looked at him quickly.  Surely, after what she had said to Hector,
Hector had not dared to speak of the girl to whom he had
given--reprehensibly, she had taken pains to make Hector understand--a
key to Jean's studio.  She believed she had frightened Hector and
Madame Mi-mi too thoroughly for that, and yet--if he had!

"Well?"--serenely, as her eyebrows went up.

"Nothing!  He knows nothing!  He heard nothing!" Jean flung out
impatiently.  "But Hector is a fool, and Valmain said he saw you go in."

"Well, was I there?" she inquired frigidly.

"No, you were not there--naturally!" he asserted with wrathful
finality.  "But--I have been thinking--if it were some one else!"

"Ah!"  Myrna's smile was cold, as she rose with a curiously ominous air
from her chair.  "Ah!  Some one else!  Well, since you bring up the
subject again, do you imagine I am so stupid that such a possibility
has not also occurred to _me_?  Your conscience seems to trouble you,
Monsieur Jean!  If there was some one else--a woman in your rooms from
two o'clock at night until daylight--you should know better who it was,
I imagine, than either Hector or Madame Mi-mi!  And since I am your
fiancée, Monsieur Jean--perhaps you will explain!"

"But, _sacre nom d'un diable_!" Jean shouted in angry amazement.  "I
know of no woman!"

"If there was a woman there it is inconceivable that you should not
know it"--Myrna's voice was monotonous, relentless.

"But, I tell you--_no_!"--Jean's hands went up in the air, as he raged
in exasperation.  "Do you understand, that I tell you--no?  It is not
so!  There was no woman there!"

"Well, then?"--still monotonously.

"Well, then?" Jean stormed furiously, clenching his fists, "it can be
nothing but that cursed Valmain and his damned jealousy!  It can be
nothing but a lie, all of it, that he has made up!  It is all a lie
then--nothing but a lie!  And so I am not through with him!  He will
answer for it!  I am not through with him!  It will not be with swords
this time--we will fight with pistols, and I will kill him!  He thinks
he has no longer any reason to hide and stay away--but, _nom de Dieu_,
he will see!  I promise you that!  Vinailles told me that Valmain would
be back the day after to-morrow, and"--he laughed out harshly--"the day
after to-morrow--"

"You are going to America," said Myrna calmly.

Jean's clenched fist, raised, remained motionless in mid-air.  He
stared at her open-mouthed.

"To--to America!" he gasped.

"To be married there," supplemented Myrna composedly.

"To be married there!"--he repeated the words in his bewilderment like
a parrot.

"And to receive an ovation, to be accorded a triumph such as you have
never dreamed of."  Her laugh trilled out deliciously.  "You will see
how they do things in America!"

He was still staring at her in dumfounded amazement.

"To America--to be married--a triumph!" he mumbled dazedly.  "But--but
who--"

"I did," said Myrna, laughing at him again.  "Did you not remind me
that I had promised to tell you about our marriage to-day?  Well, we
are to be married in America.  Are you not delighted?"

"But--but, yes!  _Mon Dieu_!  But--but, yes!" stammered Jean helplessly.

"Well, then," said Myrna, puckering up her brows in prettily affected
deliberation, "I think, Monsieur Jean, you may kiss me--once."




-- X --

THROUGH THE FOG

With an angry tightening of his lips, as he caught sight of Myrna still
the centre of the same masculine _entourage_, Jean turned from the
window where he had paused for an instant to glance into the ship's
main saloon, transformed for the moment into a ballroom, and resumed
his moody pacing up and down the deck.  He pulled his ulster more
closely about him, for the night was cold, lighted a cigarette and
puffed at it irritably, as he was forced to acknowledge the, for the
most part effusive, salutes that his fellow passengers went out of
their way to accord him, as in couples and groups they constantly came
and went between the saloon and the deck.  Then, after another turn or
two, he tossed away his cigarette with a vicious jerk, sought out the
most secluded portion of the deck--a recess near the ship's
funnels--and, appropriating a steamer chair, flung himself into it.

He had barely ensconced himself there, however, when, with a muttered
oath, he sat angrily upright in the chair again.  Was there no place on
the cursed ship where he could be alone for five minutes with his own
thoughts?  He had left the dance after a heated, if short, altercation
with Myrna, been annoyed by the advances of those on deck, and now two
women had elected to halt within earshot of him around the corner to
_discuss_ him!

"Well," murmured a voice sweetly, "have you met the famous Monsieur
Laparde yet?"

"No"--eagerly.  "Have you?"

"No--not exactly, my dear"--patronisingly.  "But I'll promise to
introduce you in the morning."

"Oh, _will_ you?  How perfectly gorgeous!  You _are_ a dear!  But how
have you managed it?  Tell me all about it!  I'm simply dying to know
how you succeeded!"

"It wasn't at all difficult"--in naïve self-disparagement.  "I met Mr.
Bliss.  He's simply charming, and so unaffected!  He is going to tell
me all about the art schools in Paris--of course, I'm terribly
interested!  There are three in their party, you know--Mr. Bliss and
his daughter, and Monsieur Laparde."

"Do you think she's pretty?  I don't see what all the men are raving
about!  And did you notice her dress to-night--those black velvet
shoulder straps are actually startling!"

"Yes--_aren't_ they?  I've heard so many remarks about them!  But I
suppose she is pretty--in a way.  It's being whispered around that she
is going to marry Monsieur Laparde.  I wonder if it's true?"

"Huh!"--with a sniff.  "Well, if it is true, Monsieur Laparde does not
do what I would do if I were a man in his place.  It's simply
outrageous the way she carries on, if she's engaged.  I wouldn't stand
it for a moment!  She must have the wool pretty thoroughly pulled over
his eyes, if he imagines she is in love with him!"

"In love with his name, my dear"--in cooing amendment.  "I don't
suppose she _does_ care for anything else.  She doesn't appeal to me as
that kind of a woman.  I'm sure I think just as you do about her.  I
wouldn't care to trust her very far from what I've seen of her--she's
the sort that always strikes me as being capable of saying _anything_
behind one's back!  She flirts mercilessly!"

"Yes; and fancy a man like Monsieur Laparde permitting himself to be
made ridiculous!  Did you notice this morning, when everybody wanted to
walk, that the deck was utterly impassable with her court spreading
their chairs two or three deep all around her?  Of course, one can't
_say_ anything!  And all the time she had Monsieur Laparde trotting
back and forth like an overgrown errand boy, carrying books and wraps
and--"

"No, my dear, you are quite wrong there.  She couldn't make a man like
Monsieur Laparde ridiculous--she could only make one feel sorry for
him."

"Well, anyway, it's quite evident that she--oh, isn't that Lord Mornely
just going inside?  Gracious, I had no idea I was getting so cold!  Do
come!  I'm nearly perished!  We'll catch our deaths out here!"

The arms of the steamer chair creaked as Jean's hands clenched upon
them.  His face was crimson with passion.  What right had these cursed
and _banale_ women to meddle in his affairs, and to discuss him?  His
hands gripped harder on the chair and it creaked again.  So, then, this
was the talk and gossip of the ship--and everybody knew it!  If it were
idle talk he could have laughed at it, and gone and bowed before them
sardonically, and taken his revenge in their confusion; but it was
true, and it only made his fury the greater.  They had but voiced his
own thoughts of five minutes ago, and his thoughts of yesterday, and of
the day before, and of the days before that, since almost from the
moment indeed that Myrna had promised to be his wife--the moment that
once, like a poor, deluded fool, he had thought would be counted the
greatest in his life!  A hundred little things during his convalescence
had been like signposts of bitter disappointment.  She cared nothing
for Jean Laparde the man; she was marrying Jean Laparde the
sculptor-genius, whose name was on every tongue!  She did not know the
meaning of love!  She loved only what his name might bring her.  There
was no tenderness, no intimacy.  She _put up_ with him--_sacré
nom_!--that was all!  He had refused to believe it in those few days in
Paris.  He had shut his eyes to it then.  He could not shut his eyes to
it here on board ship--where everybody's eyes, even those damned cats'!
were open.  And now she seemed to assume that, since he was her
property, her possession, and that the whole matter, as far as it
concerned her, was quite and entirely settled to her satisfaction, she
could devote herself to a new affair every half-hour, while he, he,
Jean Laparde, the great Laparde, looked on--and grinned!

He rose savagely from his chair, and, turning up the collar of his
ulster and pulling his cap far down over his eyes, went along to the
extreme end of the deck.  Here, unprotected by the canvas
weather-cloths such as those along the ship's side that closed in the
promenade, sheltering the passengers from the damp, driving mist of a
North Atlantic fog, it was wet and uninviting enough to guarantee him
immunity from any intrusion.  Below him, as he looked over the rail,
the steerage deck, dim, dismal, forbidding, was deserted save for a few
people, who, probably choosing the lesser of two evils, braving the
night in preference to sharing the fetid atmosphere below with many
hundred others, were huddled about in miserable discomfort.  He stared
at this sight for a moment; then turned around, and leaned with his
back against the rail to face the gay, brilliantly-lighted scene far
down at the other end of the promenade deck.  He watched this
sullenly--the extravagantly gowned women and their escorts coming and
going like hiving bees from the deck to the saloon ... clustering
around the entrance ... retailing the ship's gossip ... a breath of air
... a cigarette ... and back to the dance again.  Who cared what the
night was like?  Who cared if, far up above on the mighty liner's
bridge, oil-skinned figures peered out anxiously into the night?  Who
cared or thought of those huddled forms on the steerage deck?  Who
cared--the sea was smooth, and one could dance?

Jean dug his hands deep down into his pockets and closed them fiercely.
The long, hoarse-throated cry of the fog siren boomed out and vibrated
through the ship--and died away; and, sharp in contrast, came again the
calm, steady pulse and throb of the engines, and laughter, and the
dreamy, sobbing notes of a waltz.

And now a depression, utter and profound, a more grievous thing than
the fury that had preceded it, was settling upon him.  It was not only
Myrna, the knowledge forced home upon him that he was but a vehicle for
her ambitions, that their marriage was to be a hollow thing, a form, a
husk covering the semblance of love--it was the sea!  Until this trip
he had not seen it since he had left Bernay-sur-Mer.  It held a
thousand memories.  He had fought them back angrily, defiantly ever
since he had come on board--but they had been present almost from the
hour that the shores of the France he loved had faded from sight, and
at unexpected moments this thing and that had flashed suddenly upon
him, striking with quick, stabbing passes under his guard.  But now,
his spirits at a low ebb, reckless of combating even poignant
memories--those memories were surging overwhelmingly upon him.  It
seemed to mirror his life like some strange kaleidoscope, the sea that
he had always known; it seemed to stir something within him that was
soul-deep in his life--the smell of it in his nostrils, the feel of it
upon his cheeks was flinging wide apart now the floodgates of the past.

Living, vivid before him was the sparkling, wonderful blue of that
southern sea, fringed with the little white cottages of Bernay-sur-Mer
that had been his home; and beneath bare feet he felt again the smooth,
fine, yielding sand upon the beach where as a baby he had crawled,
where still a baby he had taken his first step, where as a man he had
struggled for his place among men and once had played a man's part.
The cheery voices of the fishermen as they launched their boats were in
his ears; they called to him; and laughed; and, because all were his
friends, twitted him good-naturedly, twitted him and teased him
about--about Marie-Louise.  Marie-Louise!  A low, sharp, involuntary
cry of pain rose to his lips.  With a violent effort he tried to shake
himself free from his thoughts--but it was as though he were in the
grip of some strange, immutable power that held him bound and shackled,
while with lightning-like rapidity, whether he would or no, upon him
rushed the ever-changing scenes.  The face of Madame Fregeau, his
foster-mother, coarse-featured perhaps, but beautiful because it was a
sweet and wholesome face, came before him; and her arms that were
rough, and red, and shapeless were around his neck in an old-time
embrace.  She had loved him, the good Mother Fregeau!  Came the faces
of Pierre Lachance, of Papa Fregeau, of little Ninon, of a score of
toddling mites clapping their hands in childish ecstasy over the clay
_poupées_ he had made for them--and all these had been his friends.
And all these were gone now, all were gone, and in their place
was--what?  He raised his head.  Hoarse-tongued, the siren cried again.
It seemed like the wail of a lost soul out-flung into the night, into
the vastness, calling, calling where there was none to answer--echoing
the loneliness that was filling his heart that night.

He had forgotten all these things in Paris; he had made himself
forget--and besides there had been Myrna.  He had fought for her,
striven for her tempestuously, fiercely, as a prize that nor heaven nor
hell could hold back from him--and, ghastly in its mocking irony, it
was only when the prize was won that, like some wondrously beautiful,
iridescent bubble, glorious in its colours as the sunlight played upon
it, it burst and nothing but the dregs of it remained as he reached out
and grasped it in his hands.  He had looked for the love, the passion
that he could give in return; he had found only a cold-blooded
strategical move on the checkerboard of social aspirations.  He was not
blind any more--nor angry.  It was only a profound and bitter
loneliness that he knew.  It would be a dreary thing, that
marriage--and dreary years.  Once, when he had no right, he had forced
his kisses upon her; he had no more inclination now to force from her
what should be so freely offered--and was withheld!

Who cared for Jean Laparde?  Not Myrna!  He had bought her as he had
sworn he would buy her, and his own words had come true--with fame.  He
was the great Laparde!  But who cared for _Jean_ Laparde?  None that he
knew now!  All that was in the past; all that was in the little village
on the Mediterranean shore in the days when he had made the clay
_poupées_ on the banks of the creek, and dreamed of that wondrous dream
statue that had been so real a thing to him--and now even that was
gone--and he was alone.

Ah, they were back again, those scenes of Bernay-sur-Mer!  Whose face
was that?  Gaston Bernier!  Old Gaston!  And what was this that he was
living again, that was so cruel in its realism?  That night on the
Perigeau ... that night when old Gaston died ... that day when he had
made the beacon for Marie-Louise, the beacon with its arms outstretched
that--he covered his face suddenly with his hands.  If he could only
strangle these thoughts--God, the loneliness and the pain they brought!

How the strains of that waltz seemed to sob out like some
broken-hearted, lost and wandering thing!  He shivered a little.  How
cold the night was, how wet and damp!  How the engines throbbed,
throbbed, throbbed, and seemed to catch the tempo of the distant music,
and like muffled drums beat time to it as to a dirge!

His hands dropped to his sides.  From far down the deck came Myrna's
rippling, silvery peal of laughter; and, through the group around her,
he caught the sparkle of the magnificent diamond necklace at her
throat, the white, fluffy wrap of fur thrown across her shoulders--and
heard her laugh again.  And at her laugh, he turned bitterly around to
the rail to face the night as the ship drove into it, to let the wind
and the wet mist blow into his face, to look down on the steerage deck
below him.  What a contrast!  There, just beneath where he stood, in
the filmy light that shone out from an open alleyway, alone,
unsheltered, a pathetic figure in the drifting mist, her clothes damp
around her, a woman leaned with bowed head against the ship's side.  A
wave of pity, but a pity that knew bitterness and irony, came upon him.
What would he read in the face of this poor immigrant if he could but
see it?  Misery?  She looked miserable enough!  Loneliness?  Was she
lonely, too?  Was she as lonely as he?  And then, as though in answer
to his thoughts, she turned suddenly, lifting her face, and with a
gesture of infinite yearning, of infinite longing, stretched out her
arms toward the land, toward France, so far behind.

He did not move.  He uttered no sound.  In that moment, as she made
that gesture, he was living only subconsciously.  It was his beacon
with outstretched arms, with those pure, perfect lips, with that sweet,
gentle face, beautiful even with the pallor that was upon it.  _It was
Marie-Louise_!

The voices, the waltz strains, the throb of the engine, the sounds
about him, the lift and fall of the liner's deck, the blackness of the
night, all were blotted from him.  He was conscious only of that figure
on the deck below.  There she stood, her arms
outstretched--outstretched as he had modelled her in that figure that
first had brought him fame, and his own words of the days gone by were
ringing in his ears again.  "See, it is a beacon--the welcome of the
fisherman home from the sea.  And are you not that, Marie-Louise, and
will you not stand on the shore at evening and hold out your arms for
me as I pull home in the boat?  Are you not the beacon,
Marie-Louise--for me?"  A welcome he had called it then, that posture
of outstretched arms, that now symbolised, mute in its anguish, the
tearing away from her of all that life had ever held to make it glad
and joyous, the love of cherished France, her native country, her home,
the friends that made home dear, those that loved her, those she loved.
Those she loved!  And of them all, she had loved him, Jean Laparde--the
most!  It seemed to sound the depths of some abysmal treason in his
soul.  Whom or what had she to welcome now?  It seemed to sum up all
the tragedy that life could hold, and sweep upon him and engulf him.
It was Marie-Louise standing there on the steerage deck!  It was
Marie-Louise!  He did not need to ask why--the answer was in his own
soul.

And now a moan broke from his lips; and condemnation, stripped of
mercy, naked, bare in its remorseless arraignment, surged upon him.
Honour, and glory, and wealth, and power, and fame, and luxury were
his--and what had she, alone here in the cold, wet misery of the
steerage, driven to the deck perhaps for a breath of pure air from
where below a thousand, babel-tongued, were cattle-herded?  What had
she--where he had all?  If the memories of that little white-cottaged
haven on the sun-kissed shores of the Mediterranean had brought him a
bitter loneliness--what must those memories be bringing to her?  There,
in Bernay-sur-Mer, was the only life that she had ever known; there
were the simple folk who loved her; there were her friends, her
associations; there was her little world; there was her all--and he had
driven her from it!  As surely as though by brutal physical force, he
had driven her from it!  Yes; he had done that!  That was why she was
here!

His face, grey as the mist around him, went down on his arms upon the
rail, and a sob shook the great shoulders.  Where were the dreams that
she and he had dreamed of life there together in the love that had
known its birth in childhood?  Where were they?  Who had shattered
them, that she was no longer there, but stood an outcast, friendless
and alone, here in the steerage of the ship that was taking her from
France?  Where was the oath that he had sworn to Gaston as the brave
old fisherman had died?  "There is a crucifix there; swear that you
will guard her and that you will let no harm come to her."  Forsworn!
A traitor!  He had chosen fame, and power, and position--and she, in
her pure, unselfish love, had stood aside for him!

Again the sullen boom of the siren mourned out into the night, held,
quavered, died away.  Silence, intense, absolute!  Then, stealing again
upon the senses, the slap and wash of water against the liner's hull,
the medley of a thousand ship sounds.

"_God_!"--the soul-torn cry fluttered from Jean's lips.

He had chosen wealth, and power, and fame, and position, and they had
been Marie-Louise's gift to him--and his gift to her in return had been
the bitterest dregs of life!  And now wealth, and power, and fame, and
position were his to-day, his beyond that of any other man's, he knew
them all; they were his; he knew the adulation and the fawning of the
great; but out of it all, out of the pomp and pageantry and the
glitter, the tinsel and the gleam of gold, where was the one supreme,
undying, immortal truth of life--who cared for Jean Laparde?

And then, as he raised his head and looked at her again, a strange,
glad wonder crept upon him.  Who cared for Jean Laparde?  Out of all
the world, who cared for Jean Laparde?  In the figure there,
wind-swept, the damp, thin clothing clinging closely about her form, in
the face, half-veiled by the night and mist, he saw again that figure
on the Perigeau Reef that once he had been man enough to risk his all,
his life to save; and the kiss that had been his, the kiss that pledged
them to each other in the fury of that storm, seemed warm again upon
his lips--a pledge again--his answer!  Who cared for Jean Laparde?

He strained toward her over the rail.  It seemed as though some flame
of glory were lighting up her face, and, reflected back, was lighting
up his own soul with understanding.  Those lips, the face, the throat,
everything, all--he knew it now!--it was _she_ that he had been
modelling there in Paris!  It was she who was the womanhood of France
to him because her soul and his were one, she who had been living in
his heart, she that he loved--she who cared for Jean Laparde!

He lifted his head, bared now, far back on the massive shoulders.
There was one way, and one way only, that he could claim her now.  To
be the Jean Laparde of old again!  To slough from him the trappings
that had stood a barrier between them!  To be the Jean Laparde again of
the world she knew!

He leaned further over the rail.  She was moving away.  He watched her,
his face aglow--watched her until she was lost in the darkness along
the deck.

"Marie-Louise!  Marie-Louise!" he whispered, and reached out his arms.
"I am coming to you, Marie-Louise--my beacon--to you, Marie-Louise."




--XI--

THE "DEATH" OF JEAN LAPARDE

How wonderful the metamorphosis in all around him!  How glad and gay
and happy were the waltz strains floating merrily upon the air from far
down the deck, how exquisite the melody and harmony rippling through
the chords!  And the chill and ugliness of the night were gone; and the
loneliness was gone; and it was as though a glorious moonlit,
star-decked sky were overhead; and the wet mist that drove upon him was
as some magical, refreshing balm that laved his face!  And in his heart
was song.

"Marie-Louise!  Marie-Louise!  I am coming to you, Marie-Louise--my
beacon--to you, Marie-Louise."  He stretched out his arms again across
the rail; and then turning, and hurrying because there was a lightness
in his steps that would not let them lag, he sought the deck
companionway close at hand, and ran up to the deck above.

Not concrete yet, only dim and misty in his mind a plan took form.
Only one thing stood out, sharp-lined, clear, absolute, irrevocable in
itself--he must go to Marie-Louise paying the price.  For, apart from
all else, apart from the certainty that if he went to her as the great
Laparde she would only bid him return again, not in bitterness but in
her splendid self-abnegation, apart from this--how else could he make
her believe him?  He, a man who once had forsworn his oath; he, who
once, in her stead, had chosen in ghastly selfishness the fame, the
position, the place that were now his--how else could he make her
believe him?  How else, unless he flung them from him, when once for
these very things, a traitor to his manhood and to her, he had turned
his back upon her, could she believe that now he held them as naught
compared to her; how else could she believe that in his soul and heart,
dominant, supreme, lived now only a love for her, greater than it had
ever been because it was chastened now, a love near like to her own
great wondrous love that she had offered him--and he had spurned?  How
else--unless to-night the great Laparde should die, and in his place
should live again the Jean Laparde she once had known, the humble
fisherman of Bernay-sur-Mer?  The fisherman of Bernay-sur-Mer!  Yes,
that was it!  It seemed to crystallise suddenly, sharply, into
definite, tangible form, the shadowy, nebulous plan that, from the
moment his decision had been made as he had stood and watched her there
below him on the steerage deck, had been seeking for expression in his
mind.  The fisherman of Bernay-sur-Mer!  None would recognise in the
fisherman of Bernay-sur-Mer the Jean Laparde that the world knew--none
save her!

He was before the door of his luxurious deck-suite, and in feverish
excitement now he flung it open, closed and locked it behind him,
switched on the lights, and ran through the sitting-room into the
bedroom beyond.  Here, where there had been confusion, his things
thrown everywhere when he had dressed for dinner and the dance, all was
now in order, and his two steamer trunks were neatly stowed away--the
steward's work--beneath the brass bed.  He dropped on his knees, and
hurriedly dragged one out--the one that Myrna Bliss had chosen for him
that day when they had gone to Marseilles from Bernay-sur-Mer.  If only
Hector had not disturbed it!  _Bon Dieu_, if Hector had not meddled
with it!  He wrenched up the lid.  It was Marie-Louise who had thrust
that fisherman's suit into his arms that day when she had told him he
was free!  What was it she had said?  Yes, yes!  "Promise me, Jean,
that you will keep these with you always, and that sometimes in your
great world you will look at them and remember--that they too belong to
France."  And he had laid them in the bottom of the trunk; and, because
he had not forgotten so soon, when Hector, whom he had found already
installed at the studio, had unpacked for him on his first arrival in
Paris, he had told Hector always to leave them there, never to take
them out--but after that he had forgotten.  He lifted out the tray, and
began to remove the clothing that lay beneath it.  It was Hector who
had packed the trunk for the journey, and--with an exultant cry, he
straightened up, the old, worn, heavy boots, the coarse socks still
tucked into their tops, in his hands.

He put these down, and reached into the trunk again.  Yes, they were
all here--the cap; the woollen shirt; the rough suit, crumpled,
white-spotted with the old salt stains of the sea.

And then for a moment he stood and looked at them--and looked about the
cabin--and for a moment fear came.  As a blow that staggered him there
fell upon him the full significance of their glaring contrast with the
rich fittings of the stateroom-de-luxe about him.  They seemed to mock
at him, these garments, and jeeringly bid him put them back again into
the trunk--as he _had_ done once before.  What hideously insincere jest
did he imagine he was playing with himself, they sneered at him!  What
had he to do with toil, and poverty, and hardship, with the life these
things stood for--he who knew the palaces of kings, he who had luxury,
he who had fame, he who had all that he had ever longed for, he who had
everything that money, that position, that authority could procure, he
who had but to rub the lamp and demand of the world his will?

"No, no!" he cried out suddenly aloud--and, with a quick, impulsive
movement, tore off his ulster and threw it on the bed.  It was
Marie-Louise now--Marie-Louise!  Once she had given her all for him.
It was Marie-Louise, wonderful, beautiful, pitiful, the saddest soul in
all the world, out there alone on the steerage deck!

And then he stood still again, hesitant, listening.  Some one was
knocking on the cabin door.  And now the door was tried--the knock
repeated.  Disturbed, uncertain, he still hesitated--then, stepping
into the sitting-room, he closed the connecting door between it and the
bedroom, and unlocked and opened the door to the deck.

It was Henry Bliss.

"Ah, you're here, Jean!" the other exclaimed, with what was obviously
an attempt at unconcern, as he stepped into the cabin.  "I've been
looking for you all over the ship.  What are you doing up here in your
room alone, with all this gaiety going on below?  Eh--what's the
matter?"

Jean stared at Henry Bliss a little sullenly.  Since the other had
come, was there--it remained only to get rid of him as soon as possible.

"There is nothing the matter," he said shortly--and shrugged his
shoulders.

Henry Bliss frowned, and rubbed his hand over his chin nervously.

"Confound it, Jean!" he burst out abruptly.  "I know better!  You and
Myrna have been having another--er--another misunderstanding.  In fact,
she--that is, I discovered it a few moments ago.  I"--he glanced about
him as though to make sure they were alone, and caught Jean's arm
confidentially--"I spoke to her very seriously, very seriously about
it.  I--I am sure it is nothing.  It is only that you take these things
very much to heart, Jean, while she laughs at them."

"_Pardieu_!" ejaculated Jean ironically.  "That is so!"

"No, no!" said Henry Bliss, hurriedly and in confusion.  "No--I--that
is not what I meant, Jean.  Not at all what I meant!  I mean that if
she takes it lightly, it cannot--er--be so--er--"

"I know what you mean," said Jean moodily.  "I have discovered it for
myself."

"Tut, tut!" protested Henry Bliss anxiously.  "This will never do at
all, Jean!  You must both make an effort to understand each other
better.  Myrna is very--er--high-spirited--very!  You see that, of
course, Jean--eh?  Well?  Tut, tut!  That is all!  You must not be too
firm or--er--exacting with her at first.  I have found--that is, I have
not found that to be the most tactful way of handling her.  Now slip on
your overcoat, my boy, and we'll go down together."

Again Jean shrugged his shoulders.  Would it be necessary to open the
door and bow even Henry Bliss out?

"No," he said, with pointed finality; "not now.  I prefer to remain
here for a little while--alone."

Henry Bliss, perturbed and upset, coughed uneasily--and suddenly began
to fumble through his pockets.  His fingers encountering first a cigar,
he took it out mechanically, and, as evidence of the composure he did
not possess, bit off the end with deliberate care.  Then he fumbled
through his pockets again, and this time produced a marconigram.  He
tapped it playfully with one finger, and smiled engagingly at Jean.

"Well, well, I knew I had a panacea with me," he said cheerily.  "This
came by wireless half an hour ago; it's what sent me out on the hunt
for you, and ran me into Myrna, and made me stumble on the lovers'
quarrel that I am sure will end just like all the rest of them--eh--my
boy?  Listen!"--unfolding the message.  "It is from a gentleman with
whom I am well acquainted, who is very prominent in art circles in New
York, stating that he has just learned that you are en route for
America, and asking, on behalf of the leading New York societies, if
you will accept a public reception on the steamer's arrival in New
York.  There you are, my boy!  Think of that!  I promise you that it
will be something to eclipse anything you could imagine.  We _do_
things in America--if I say it myself!  It will be the triumph of your
career.  Bands, flags, bunting, cheers, the dock _en fête_--to say
nothing of reporters"--he was laughing now, and patting Jean's arm
excitedly.  "They'll show you, my boy, what they think of Jean Laparde
in America!  That's the kind of a welcome they're getting ready for
you--it will be the greatest moment of your life!  But here"--he stole
an almost wistful glance at Jean, and stepping over to the writing desk
at the side of the cabin, laid the marconigram down--"I'll just leave
this here, and"--he coughed again, and moved tactfully to the
door--"and you just kind of think about that instead of anything else,
and--er--in about half an hour or so, I'll bring Myrna along up, and
we'll talk it all over together--eh--my boy?"

He waved his hand genially, and, without waiting for a reply, went out.

For a moment Jean did not move; then his eyes, as though drawn
irresistibly in that direction, shifted from the door that had closed
on Henry Bliss to the marconigram lying on the desk--and abruptly he
walked over and picked up the wireless message.  He read it through
laboriously, for his English still came hard to him--and read it again,
more slowly, lingering over the words, muttering snatches of the
sentences aloud.  "... Shall spare no effort ... endeavour worthily to
express our sentiments ... splendid genius of which France is so justly
proud..."

And, holding it there in his hands, a dull flush came and spread itself
over Jean's face.  The triumph of his career, Henry Bliss had said--the
greatest moment of his life!  This great and wonderful America, of
which he had heard so much, was waiting for him eagerly--waiting for
him--Jean Laparde--Jean Laparde!  This was to be his welcome to that
New Land where all was on a scale so tremendous and magnificent.  To
his ears there came the mighty roar of thousands shouting again and
again the name of Jean Laparde; before his eyes a sea of faces looked
up into his from dense-lined streets as he drove along--and all, all in
that vast multitude were cheering, waving, acclaiming Jean Laparde.
They were waiting for him there at the gateway to America, open-handed,
royal in their hospitality, to pay him honour such as he had never
known before.  They were waiting for him there--for him--for Jean
Laparde!  They were waiting--

The flush faded from his face, and a whiteness came, and upon his
forehead oozed out a bead of moisture--and, as the seconds passed, he
hung there almost limply, swaying a little in the agony that was upon
him.  And then slowly the paper that was in his hands was torn across,
and the pieces fluttered to the floor, and the great head rose proud in
kingship on the broad shoulders--the kingship of himself, the kingship
of Jean Laparde.

Ay, they were waiting for him--but there was another beside who was
waiting too!  He looked at the torn pieces of paper on the floor--and
his laugh rang suddenly clear and buoyant through the cabin.  Once he
had sold his soul for such as that; but to-night, in spite of these
devil's tempters that sought to shake his resolution--there was his
answer!  There was his answer--the answer that had come to him through
the fog and mist as through a veil rent suddenly asunder, the answer
that was in Marie-Louise's outstretched arms, the answer that was in
her banishment from the friends and the France she loved, in the bitter
wrong that he had done, in her love that now he knew for its priceless
worth!  There in that torn paper was his answer!

And he laughed again--and as he laughed, he ran to the door and locked
it for the second time.  There would be no more of that, no more
interruption, no more of those tempter thoughts, no more of them!  And,
for the moment, no more thought even of Marie-Louise.  He had need to
centre all his attention upon his immediate acts now, for he must be
very careful what he did.  And he had little time--had not Henry Bliss
said that in half an hour he would return with Myrna?

He ran back into the bedroom, tore off his coat, vest and shirt; and,
catching up his toilet-case, hurried into the bathroom.  Here, he
clipped off his beard and shaved it close--then quickly, a sort of
tense, keyed-up excitement constantly growing upon him, he returned
once more to the bedroom, and, stripping off the remainder of his
clothes, began to put on the fisherman's suit.  How heavy and stiff the
boots felt upon his feet, how rough and coarse the socks were against
his skin--and yet how their familiarity thrilled him!  He swung his
arms, wondering and laughing at the free play of his muscles in the
loose shirt, and memories and thoughts began to press upon him--but he
checked them almost instantly, for there was no time now for that.

He finished dressing hastily.  He must leave no clue behind him that
would occasion even a suspicion that he had not carried out the purpose
that the world, and essentially those on board the ship, must be made
to believe was the last act of Jean Laparde.  Amongst a thousand,
amongst the conglomerate races that cluttered the ship's steerage,
where even amongst themselves few knew each other, where difference in
language precluded all but the most scattered and superficial
acquaintanceship, none would recognise Jean Laparde in the rough-garbed
fisherman--provided always that no search was instituted, provided
always that there should be no _incentive_ in the mind of any one to
search, provided always that it was accepted as a fact--that Jean
Laparde was dead!  He could not hope perhaps, between now and the time
they reached New York, or, at least, on landing, to escape the
attention of the ship's officers or the shore officials; but with Jean
Laparde a suicide in the mist and fog of that Atlantic night, he would
be no more to them than one as rough and ignorant and poor as those
others in the steerage--no more than a stowaway.

Jean dropped down on his knees again beside the trunk, and began to
replace the articles he had been obliged to remove in order to get at
the fisherman's suit.  Nothing--not a sign of anything approaching
disorder must appear.  They would look through everything--Myrna and
her father!  He shrugged his shoulders whimsically.  The visit of Henry
Bliss to the cabin, the other's knowledge of the quarrel with Myrna,
the other's concern over his, Jean's, moodiness, was, after all, not to
be regretted!  It would have its significance for Henry Bliss!

He pushed the trunk back beside its mate under the bed.  Money now!  A
sudden, sharp exclamation, almost of dismay, escaped him.  He had
little or no money--a few French notes, sufficient for his needs on
board ship only.  Monsieur Bliss had said more was unnecessary--that he
could make drafts through the other's banking connections in New York
as he needed them.  He searched through the clothes he had taken off,
found his pocketbook, opened it, and counted the contents--five
twenty-franc notes, a ten-franc gold piece, some silver--that was all!
Less than twenty-five dollars in American money!  Well, if it was
all--it was all!  It could not be helped!  He shoved the pocketbook
philosophically into his pocket; and, gathering up the clothes he had
worn, tied them into a bundle.  There remained only the heavy ulster.

He looked slowly, critically about him; and, satisfied that he had
overlooked nothing, walked swiftly into the sitting-room, seated
himself at the writing desk, and, from one of its pigeon-holes, pulled
out a sheet of the ship's notepaper.  He hesitated a moment
thoughtfully--then picked up a pen.

"_Je m'ennui de tout_--I am tired of it all," he wrote.  He balanced
the pen in his fingers, and stared at the words cynically.  What a
commotion it would cause!  What food for excitement, for the hysteria
of those who cared nothing save for the self-importance it brought them
in being so intimately connected with so famous a tragedy as to have
been on the _same_ ship where it occurred!  They would remember what he
had eaten for dinner that night, and quarrel over who had last seen
him; and they would envelope themselves with an air of pained and
morbid gloom--and cling to the gloom tenaciously because they delighted
in it!  What an event!  And out of them all, with the exception of
Henry Bliss, there was none who--ah, yes!  Ironically, as the grim
humour of it struck him, a smile curled Jean's lips.  The stewards who
had looked after him would care very much!  That one might die, if one
wished, was all very well; but to be inconsiderate enough to jump
overboard without leaving the _douceurs_ of the voyage behind, could be
construed as nothing less than a personal affront!  He reached suddenly
into his pocket, the irony of the thought lost in a flash of
inspiration, and pulled out his pocketbook.  It was the one crowning
touch required to stamp as a fact, beyond a peradventure of doubt, the
conviction that he had made away with himself.  He could ill spare any
of the money; but he could much less afford to ignore anything that
would lend colour to his plan and so minimise the risk of discovery!
He opened the pocketbook again, took from it three of the twenty-franc
notes, tucked these into his pocket, and laid the pocketbook with the
balance of the money inside of it down upon the desk.  It was not a
fitting amount, doubtless--but there was his pocketbook and all there
was in it!  What more could any one give?  He took up his pen, and
finished his note.  "Please divide what is in my pocketbook amongst my
stewards.  Adieu!  Jean."

He folded the note, placed it in an envelope, sealed it, addressed it
to Henry Bliss, and, carrying it with him, returned to the bedroom and
pinned it securely to the sleeve of his ulster.  Then, taking up both
the ulster and the bundle he had made of the clothes in which he had
been dressed that evening, and leaving the lights turned on, he went to
the outer cabin door, opened it cautiously, and peered out.  Here, on
the upper deck, there was no one in sight.  He opened the door wide,
marked the spot where the light, flooding from the room, lay across the
ship's rail; then, stepping out on the deck, he closed the door softly
behind him.

For a moment he stood in the darkness, looking about him, listening.
There was nothing--only the ship-sounds--only the confused voices and
laughter of the passengers on the deck below--only, faint-borne, the
music from the ship's saloon.  And then, he crept across the deck to
the rail; and, drawing himself back to give his arm full play, he
hurled the bundle with all his strength far out over the ship's
side--and as he hurled it, in requiem as it were for Jean Laparde,
through the night there crashed, and boomed, and moaned, and whined
anew the sullen blast of the siren.

It startled him momentarily; but the next instant he stooped and laid
the ulster upon the deck beside the rail.  It was perhaps fastidious in
a suicide to remove his ulster, but the light from his room, when the
door was opened, that would shine upon the white paper pinned on the
sleeve, would disclose a sufficient motive!

It was done!  In all the world now for him there was only one to share
his life--a life whose future course he could not see, nor guess; but a
life where, greatest of all gifts, most splendid of all splendours, was
love.  There was but one--only one--and that one out of all the world
was she alone who cared for Jean Laparde.  And she did not know yet
that he was there, that he was going to her, that he would never leave
her again--but in a moment she would know!  In only another moment now
I Ah, he could see the pure, beautiful face shine in welcome with the
gladdest light it had ever known; the great eyes, deep, true and
fearless, grow dim and misty in their wondrous smile; those lips,
divine in contour, lift in tenderest passion to his; her arms stretch
out, no more in cruel longing, in bitter emptiness, but stretch
out--stretch out to him!

"Marie-Louise!  Marie-Louise!"--like a prayer, softly, he breathed her
name; and, thrilled, eager, his blood afire, he turned from the rail,
and ran to the deck companionway.

Barring a possible encounter with a ship's officer who might stop and
question him, he would have little trouble in reaching the steerage
deck.  He was not obliged to enter any part of the ship's saloons or
alley-ways--he had only to descend to the deck below, and from there it
was but a half dozen steps to the head of the ladder with its little
sign "passengers forbidden" that led directly to the steerage deck.
True, it was possible that some of the steerage passengers might notice
him descending the ladder, but they would be too far away and it was
too dark for them to see his face from any distance; and to them, in
any event, unaccustomed to question, it would mean nothing more, if
indeed they gave it any thought at all, than some one of the ship's
crew in the ordinary performance of his duty.

At the head of the companionway Jean stopped to assure himself that the
saloon passengers were still avoiding the wet, unsheltered portion of
the deck beneath; and then, descending quickly, he stole across the
deck-space below, gained the second ladder, and, boldly now, but with
the swift agility born of the fishing days of Bernay-sur-Mer that any
seaman might have envied, swung himself down to the steerage deck.  And
here, almost leisurely, he turned, and, seeking the darkest shadows,
and so disappearing from the sight of any of the steerage passengers
who, still huddled about the deck, might have noticed him, he stood
motionless, close up against the ship's superstructure.  It was perhaps
an exaggerated precaution; but it would preclude the possibility of any
one of them connecting him, when he eventually went amongst them, with
the man who had come down the ladder and presumably had disappeared in
some, to them mysterious, where all was mysterious, recess of the ship.

His heart was pounding, he could feel the hot blood flush his cheeks,
as his eyes strained through the gloom and semi-darkness, searching the
deck.  Was she still there--somewhere?  Surely, surely she had not yet
gone below!  For then it would be very hard, perhaps impossible, to
find her until to-morrow, and he could not wait so long as that; for it
was to-night that he was to take Marie-Louise in his arms again, and
hold her there, and stand, they two, and look into each other's eyes,
glad, beyond any gladness else, in the love that God had given back to
them.  To-morrow?  No!  To-night!  To-night!  It must be to-night!
Surely she was still here!  Yes--who was that, whose form he could just
make out in the darkness at the ship's side far along the deck?

He moved quickly now, still keeping in the shadows, until he reached
the side of the ship furthest away from the ladder by which he had
descended, and then stepped out across the deck.  He passed little
knots of people, and voices in strange tongues that he had never heard
before fell upon his ears; but he gave them no heed--there was only
that figure, alone, apart, toward which he was hurrying.  And
now--yes--he was sure!  Her back was turned, and, as before, she was
leaning ever the ship's side, but--yes--yes--it was Marie-Louise!

He halted a yard away from her, trembling with an emotion that brought
a strange weakness to his limbs, and reached out his arms--her name
quivering, low and passionate, his soul in his voice, upon his lips.

"Marie-Louise!"

She turned sharply, in a frightened, startled way, and for a moment
stared at him; and then, even in the darkness, he could see her face
grow deathly white, while her hand groped blindly out behind her for
support.

"Dead!" she whispered.  "I was praying to the _bon Dieu_ for you, Jean.
And now you are dead, and you have come to me."

"Ay!" he cried blunderingly in his joy.  "Ay, that is true,
Marie-Louise!  Jean Laparde is dead!"

She moaned a little, and shrank back, and pressed her hands to her face.

"Dead!" she whispered again.  "You are dead, Jean, and you have come to
me."

She was swaying as he caught her in his arms.  Fool, accursed fool,
that he had not understood!

"No, no; Marie-Louise, _chérie, ma bien-aimée_!" he said tenderly.
"See, are my arms not real about you?  See, it is I, it is really I!
It is not death, it is love that has brought me!  See, Marie-Louise,
lie very still for a little while in my arms, and you will not be any
more afraid."

It seemed as though for a space she were in a faint, so white her face
was, so quiet she lay; and then her hand felt out and touched his
shoulder, and his face, and his hair in a wondering, hesitant,
incredulous way.

Her lips moved.

"You--you are like Jean as he used to be before he went away to the
_grand monde_."

He bent his head, and laid his cheek against her cheek.

"Yes, Marie-Louise," he said softly.  "And now I shall always be that
Jean.  Try very hard now to understand, little one!  See, I am back
again--for always--for always--and I will never go away from you any
more.  Don't you see, _petite_, that it is really Jean?"

"Yes," she said, in a low, dead voice, "it is Jean; but how can it be
Jean--here--on this great ship--when Jean, I know, is in France--for I
left Jean in France."

And then Jean laughed--because it would help to drive the sense of
unreality from her mind, and because in his heart was only joyous
laughter.

"It is very simple, that!  I came with Monsieur Bliss and mademoiselle.
And it is no more strange for me to be here than for you--than that I
should have seen you a little while ago from the deck up there,
Marie-Louise."

She seemed to rouse herself as though in dawning comprehension, raising
herself a little in his arms.

"But the clothes--those clothes that you are wearing!" she faltered.

"Ah, Marie-Louise!" he cried out happily.  "Do you not remember?  Was
it not you who told me that day that I was to keep them with me always?
And see, I have kept them--and they have brought me back to you!"

He felt her tremble suddenly, and draw away.

"Let me go, Jean."  And, as he released her, she stood for an instant
clinging to the ship's side, her head turned away, before she spoke
again.  "You--you put them on to come down here to me?" she said dully,
at last.

"But, yes!  But, yes!  What else?" he answered eagerly.  "To come to
you, Marie-Louise!"

She faced him, pitifully white.

"Oh, Jean, Jean!  Why did you do it?"--it was a bitter, hopeless cry.
"What good could this hour bring to you, what could it give you when
you go back there that you have not already got, while for me"--her
voice broke--"it was so hard before--so hard before, and now--"

She did not understand!  She did not understand!  He caught her hands.

"It is not for an hour!"--his voice was ringing, vibrant, glad.  "It is
not for an hour, Marie-Louise, it is for--always--always!  I am not
going back.  I have come for always--to be with you always now,
Marie-Louise, as long as we shall live.  Look up, Marie-Louise!  Look
up, and smile with those wondrous lips, and put your arms around my
neck, and lay your head upon my shoulder, for there is none here to see
or heed."

She did not move; and, as she stood there staring at him, the colour
came into her face--and went again, leaving it as white and drawn as it
had been before.

"You are not going back"--she scarcely breathed the words.  Then,
almost wildly: "Jean, what do you mean?  Your life, your work, your--"

"Are yours, my Marie-Louise," he said quickly.  "It was that I meant
when I told you Jean Laparde was dead."

"Mine!  You would do this--for me--for me--Jean?"--it was as though she
were speaking to herself, so low her voice was, as she leaned slowly
toward him.  "For me?" she said again; and in a tender, wistful way
took his face between her hands, and looked a long time into his eyes
while her own grew dim.  "You are very wonderful, and big, and brave,
and strong, Jean," she whispered presently; and there was a little
quickened pressure of her hands upon his cheeks, and then they fell
away--and she shook her head.  "But it can never be, Jean--it can never
be.  You must go back."

"Never be!" Jean echoed--but now there was a sudden fierce triumph in
his voice.  "It _must_ be now, for there is no other way.  I cannot go
back!  Have I not told you that Jean Laparde is dead?  Listen, listen,
Marie-Louise, my little one.  Up there I have destroyed all traces of
myself, and in a little while they will find the note I left, and
believe that I have thrown myself overboard.  Ah, Marie-Louise, when I
saw you here to-night--see, you were standing down there with your arms
stretched out!  But how can I tell you--the joy, the grief, the
_misérable_ I had been?  But it was only you then--you, Marie-Louise,
my Marie-Louise again!  And I must show you it was true that my life
should be yours, that I knew at last all else against your love was
nothing, that I had been as some sick soul wandering, deluded, in a
world of phantom things--ah, I do not say it well, Marie-Louise, but
you must read my heart, and out of that great love of yours forgive.
And I must make you believe--my beacon!  Do you remember that?  My
beacon!  Ah, Marie-Louise, for a little while I lost it in the darkness
and the storm, but now it is bright again, and it shall always burn for
me.  And so, see, I have come; and it is the long past back again, and
the between is gone, and it is again as the night old Gaston died, and
you and I, Marie-Louise, are alone together in all the world."

"Jean!  Jean!" she said brokenly--and turned away her head, and,
leaning there, buried it in her arms.  When she looked up again her
face was wet with tears.

He held out his arms to her, and smiled.

But now again she shook her head; and, as her lips quivered, gently
pushed his arms away, and took one hand of his in both her own.

"Jean, it is not too late," she was trying bravely to control her
voice.  "You must go back.  The _bon Dieu_ has given you a great life
to live, and a great work to do--the work you love."

"It was not the work that I loved--it was Jean Laparde," he said, with
a bitter laugh.  "But now, I tell you again, Jean Laparde is dead."

"There is your life and there is your work," she went on, as though she
had not heard him.  "And, Jean--Jean, I have seen them both, and--and
so I know."

"You have seen them!" he repeated in a puzzled way.  "What is that you
say?"

"Yes," she said.  "Jean, it was I who went to your studio that night.
It was I that Monsieur Valmain saw enter there.  I had a cloak and hat
that Father Anton had given me that had belonged to Mademoiselle Bliss."

"You?" he cried out, in wild amazement.

"Wait!" she said tensely.  "It does not matter if you know now, since
you have seen me here; and I am telling you because--because I must
make you understand that I know what your life is there in the great
world, and how the name of Jean Laparde is honoured, and how now, more
than ever before, Jean, you belong to France--and that you must go
back--and that this can never, never be, Jean--and that I can never let
you do this thing."

He stared at her for a moment and could not speak.  It was Marie-Louise
who had been at the studio that night!  There was bewilderment upon
him; and there was something of finality in the gentle voice that swept
the laughter from his heart, and brought a cold, dead thing there in
its place.  And then a sudden, eager uplift came.

"You were there that night!" he said swiftly.  "What brought you there,
Marie-Louise?  What brought you there--to Paris--from Bernay-sur-Mer?"

She did not answer.

"Ah, I know!  I know!" he cried out joyously.  "It was your love,
Marie-Louise--your love that brought you there.  And so you love me
now, Marie-Louise--and how then can you talk of sending me away?"

"I have always loved you, Jean," she said simply.  "It is because I
love you that I must not let you do this thing."

"And it is because I love you that I _will_ do it!" he burst out
passionately.  "Marie-Louise, you were there that night!  But is that
all?  You do not say it, but perhaps you are thinking of Mademoiselle
Bliss.  You have seen her?  She knew you were there?  That you were in
Paris?  You knew that we--"

"She told me that you were to be married, Jean," Marie-Louise
interrupted quietly.  "But it is not of her that I am thinking."

"She does not love me, I do not love her--_voilà_!  There is the end of
that!"  Jean flung out his arms.  "It is the work then?  Well, listen,
Marie-Louise, to a wonderful secret that came to me to-night.  It is
you--you--your eyes, your face, your lips, your beauty, that has made
the name of Jean Laparde!  It is you that I have been modelling all
this time--it is you who have been my model--you, my Marie-Louise!  And
I in my blind conceit did not realise it, and dreamed that I was
creating out of my own genius the true, perfect, glorious womanhood of
France--and it was you!  You did not know that, my little one!"

"I am not that, Jean," she said steadily.  "But I knew that night.
Monsieur Valmain, when he saw me, when I stepped out into the studio
and you--you were lying there on the floor, Jean--Monsieur Valmain said
so.  And afterwards, Mademoiselle Bliss said so too."

"Monsieur Valmain!  Myrna!  The others too--they all saw you there!
They knew!  Ah!"--he cried, a gathering fury in his voice.  "Ah, I
begin to understand Myrna's sudden desire for a voyage to America!
There was to be no chance that we should meet, you and I, Marie-Louise!
_Nom de Dieu_, I begin to see--many things!  And you, meanwhile--how
did she get rid of you?  She made you leave Paris, eh?  You were to go
away!"

"It was what I must do.  It was not mademoiselle who made me," she
answered.  "I was sick for a little while, and then I went away.  Oh,
Jean, can you not see what I have been trying to make you understand?
I had no right even to have _risked_ your seeing me, and I had meant
that it should never be possible again--and so--and so that is why I am
here.  And now you have come to-night, Jean!  It is very, very strange,
and--and"--her voice was breaking again, despite the brave efforts at
self-control--"but it cannot change anything--and you must go back--to
France--and to your work.  Go, Jean; go now, or I--I must go,
because--because--"

"Marie-Louise!"--it was like some panic fear at his heart.
"Marie-Louise--you do not mean that?"

"There is no other way," she said.

"But it is you who do not understand!" he told her frantically.  "My
work!  Can I not still work anywhere--anywhere where you and I can live
our lives together, anywhere so that the world cannot come between us
again?  Somewhere in America and we will begin a new life together.
And is it not you that I need for that work?  Is it not you that I must
have if I am to work at all?"

"I was not with you, Jean, in Paris," she said, and tried to smile,
"and yet all the world knows the name of Jean Laparde."  She held out
her hands.  "I am going now, Jean--and you must go back to that world.
It was so grand and big, Jean, for you to do what you have done
to-night--but there is _to-morrow_.  Jean, dear Jean, in your great
loving impulse you have not counted that.  You could not live without
the world you have come to know.  You think you could to-night, because
to-night there is only love; but to-morrow all that you would so
splendidly have thrown away would begin to call to you again, and it
would grow stronger and stronger, and you could never forget, and
misery would come."

"You do not believe me?"--it was like some cruel amazement upon him.
"You do not believe me?  It is because once I thought those things
greater than your love!  And you do not believe me now, Marie-Louise!"

"It is because I will not let you spoil your life that I am going," she
said slowly; "it is because I must make you understand that I will not
let you do this thing; because you must, and I must make you--go back."
She stood an instant looking at him, the dark eyes wide and tearless
now, the lips parted bravely in a smile--and then she turned and walked
from him along the deck.

"Marie-Louise!  No!" he cried out hoarsely, and stepped after her.  "I
will not go back, Marie-Louise!  I will never go back!  It is done!
Marie-Louise!  Marie-Louise!"

She did not answer him until she had reached the head of the steerage
companionway that led below--and then for a moment she paused.

"All your life, Jean," she whispered, "you will be glad of what you
have done to-night, because it was so brave a thing to do; and it will
make you a better man, and I am no more afraid, as once I was, that you
will forget that it is the _bon Dieu_, and not yourself, who has made
you great.  And after a little while you will be glad too that I--that
I have gone."

She was gone!  He stood there in a numbed way.  She was gone!  He could
not seem to realise that.  Go back!  Go back--and leave Marie-Louise!
Only that one thing was clear out of his dazed and staggered
consciousness.  He would not go back!  He would never go back!
To-morrow, ay and the to-morrows all through life, Marie-Louise would
find him there!

He raised his head suddenly, and turned and looked behind him.  High
above on that upper deck there seemed a strange confusion--and on the
moment, from the bridge shrilled out an officer's whistle.  Then, from
deep down within the ship, the engine-room bell sounded in a muffled
clang; and an instant later dark forms were scurrying around one of the
lifeboats; and now there were shouts, the creak of tackle--and the
vibration of the ship was gone.

He moved back along the deck to stand close below the rail of the main
deck where, oblivious to the damp and wet now, the passengers in
low-necked gowns, in evening dress, the dance forgotten, were crowding,
jostling and pushing each other in mad excitement.

A dozen voices spoke at once.

"Somebody has fallen overboard! ... Who is it? ... Who is it? ... How
did it happen? ... Who is it? ... Who is it?..."

Jean's brows gathered in perplexed, strained furrows.  Myrna and
Monsieur Bliss had made their discovery of course, that was evident;
but to stop the ship, to lower a boat when it was obviously absurd,
when they had every reason to assume that his body by then must be
miles astern!  What was the meaning of that?

The ship was silent, still, motionless now, save for the tumult of the
excited passengers; the lifeboat dropped into the water and rowed
away--and then a queer smile flickered on Jean's lips.  Ah, yes!  It
was Myrna--mistress of every situation!  Her fiancé as a _suicide_ was
impossible; an _accident_ of course was quite another thing--that was
only deplorable!  She and her father had influence enough with the
captain, in whom no doubt they had confided what they believed to be
the truth, to induce him to carry out, for the benefit of the
passengers and all else on board, the semblance of accident, and the
attempt at rescue; and, besides, as far as the captain was concerned,
was it not the great Laparde, the most famous of his passengers, who
was involved--whose name was to be preserved from infamy and dishonour?
He shrugged his shoulders.  What story had that clever brain of Myrna's
devised to fit the case?  Had she _seen_ the accident itself?

"Who is it? ... Who is it?" cried the passengers above him.  "How did
it happen? ... Who is it? ... Who is it?..."

And then a voice above the others, breathless with importance:

"It was Jean Laparde!  He was up on the deck above with Mr. and Miss
Bliss.  He dropped his cigarette-holder, it rolled across the deck and
went outside the rail, where the boats are, you know, and the ship
lurched as he stooped to pick it up, and--"

"And so, you see, Marie-Louise," completed Jean to himself, in
whimsical wistfulness, "and so, you see, Marie-Louise, that Jean
Laparde is dead."




-- XII --

AT THE "GATEWAY"

What confusion, what noise, what bewilderment--tugs pulling and
snorting as they warped the great liner into her berth; orders shouted;
the cries of passengers leaning from the upper decks to the knot of
people gathered on the pier below; and, distant, like the muffled roll
of a drum, the roar from the city streets!

Marie-Louise clasped at her little bundle of clothing timidly.  For
hours she had stood there on the crowded steerage deck; for hours she
had strained her eyes toward the land, and then at the mighty city
unfolding itself as the liner steamed up the harbour.  And she had
gazed long, too, at that majestic, towering figure on the little island
that had evoked such strange emotions from all these people around
her--a figure whose fame must be very great, for of these, who could
not read or write, who were ignorant and poor, who came from so many,
many lands, none, it seemed, even to the little children, but knew and
reached out their arms to it, some laughing in hysteria, and some with
tears, but all with the one word upon their lips that neither dialect
nor tongue confused--liberty!

It was that they had come for, these Czechs of Moravia, these
Croatians, these Slovenes from the Austrian provinces of Carinthia and
Styria, these Lithuanians and Magyars; it was that, too, that had
brought these Jews from a score of lands where the blessed cross that
Father Anton had taught her to adore symbolised neither love nor rest
for them.  How many stories of oppression, and cruelty, and
hopelessness had she listened to on the voyage from such as she could
understand?  It was not the dream of money alone that brought them; it
was because, they had told her over and over again, that here they had
heard was the land of freedom, that here they could work with no
tyranny to rob them of their toil or of their souls, that here they
were to know happiness because here was liberty.

How they laughed, and talked, and sobbed, and whispered around her now!
How they crowded, and pushed, and swayed in their excitement!  How
eager some were, how dazed and frightened were others!  What a riot of
colour and strange dress the women and the men wore!  How they clung to
their bundles, as instinctively she clung to hers!

What did it mean, that word--liberty?  She too, had come for liberty.
She, too, had fled from her native country; she, too, had fled to seek
freedom from the scenes and memories that were there.  That day when
she had gone so blindly to the _Gare St. Lazare_ and a train had taken
her to Havre, that day when she had no thought of any definite place to
go save that she must first of all leave Paris and then go far away, it
had seemed like an answer to her perplexity when, in Havre, she had
seen the sign in the window of the steamship office about the ship
sailing for America from there.  And she had bought a ticket; and
then--and then that night, here, here on the ship, Jean had come to her.

Her lips quivered suddenly, and her eyes filled with tears.  None, none
but the _bon Dieu_ and herself knew how near she had come that night to
yielding to her love; none else knew how through that brave, splendid
act of Jean's her love had seemed suddenly a thousand-fold greater,
making it that much the harder to deny, as it pleaded with her to
answer the cry of her soul.  Oh, it had been so hard, so hard before to
let Jean go, to send him from her--but that night when she had turned
from him here upon the deck it had been as though she were walking out
into some cold, dread place of eternal darkness, where there was no
life, no living thing, and all was utter desolation.  Why--why had she
done it?  She had asked herself that a thousand times in the days since
then, in the nights when she had lain sleepless in her bunk; and yet,
even while she asked, the answer was always present, always there,
repeating itself over and over again--Jean had not realised what he was
doing, Jean had not realised what he was doing.  It was like Jean, so
like the big, brave Jean of the old days to give his all on the impulse
of the moment, and never a thought to what it might mean in the
afterwards.  That was why she had sent him away that night--that was
why.  She would not have been strong enough to have done it for any
other cause.  She had only been strong because of the bitter regret,
the misery that would have come when he began to realise, even with a
few hours of the hardships of the steerage, what he had lost--he who
would have come from comfort, from refinement to where even soap and
water were luxuries; to food that he could not eat, dealt out of huge
kettles into dinner pails; to where there was little light and the air
was foul; to where like cattle in a pen they slept two hundred in a
compartment; to where, instead of servants at his beck and call, there
was cold, brutal contempt--and oftentimes a curse; to where, even to
her, who had not known the luxuries of Jean's life, it had brought
dismay!  Yes; in a day of this, even in a few hours of it, with its
terrific contrast, he would have known, and--and his love, great as it
must have been to have prompted his impulse to the sacrifice that he
had tried to make, would not be strong enough to compensate for what he
had lost, to make him happy.  And so--and so she had sent him back.
And the _bon Dieu_ had been very good to her to give her the strength
to do it, for she had been right, and she had known Jean better than he
knew himself.  She had been right; it had been only impulse, stronger
than himself for the moment, that had brought him to her, only
impulse--for he had gone back.  She had not seen him since that night,
not even a glimpse of him amongst the passengers on what little of
those decks above that she could see, though she had looked whenever,
safe from observation herself amongst a crowd of the steerage
passengers, she had ventured out on deck.  She would have liked to have
asked about him, but who was there to ask?  To the steerage the life of
the great ship was as a thing apart; no news, nothing came to the
steerage--sufficient to the steerage was the babel of its own
hundred-tongues.

She brushed the tears angrily from her eyes.  She should be glad and
thankful that she had not been unfair to Jean, that she had not taken
advantage of that moment of impulse to so tremendous a sacrifice; she
should be glad, not sorrowful--and yet it was not easy to be glad when
the pain in the heart was always there, and there was loneliness that
would not let her spirits be gay or bright.  Liberty!  What did it
mean, that word--liberty?  She had left her native land to seek it--and
what she had found so far could only make the memories keener, add to
them, and bring a greater sadness.

About her every one was talking, some boisterously, some whose cheeks
were wet, some who swore valiantly, some as though they prayed; but all
eager, all expectant, all with that word "liberty" continuously upon
their lips.  It meant that, throughout all the remote places of Europe,
in the mountains, in the valleys, in the plains, in the towns and
villages of countries she had never heard of before, this great new
land of America was known, and meant--liberty.

She wondered if it could be true, if this could be a land of magic that
transformed all bitterness and misery into sunshine and song.  She
wondered if the dreams of all these strange creatures who had come from
so many different worlds to this one because its name was liberty would
find their dreams realised--if there might not be for some a cruel
awakening that would be more than they could bear.  This woman who
stood beside her, old before her prime, who was very dirty, who was so
queerly dressed, who crooned incessantly to the child in her arms--what
dreams was she dreaming, what hopes had she, what was it that this new
land was to bring to her?  And then a great, tender wave of pity swept
Marie-Louise.  They had been standing there so long!  And how drawn and
weary the woman's face was, and how her arms must ache!

"Give me the baby for a little while," she said--and placed her bundle
at her feet, and took the child in her arms.

And now the confusion around her and about the ship increased.  They
had come alongside an enormous shed; and, though she could not see, she
was sure from the noise and commotion that the rich passengers were
getting off.  But it was well that she could not see.  She was glad of
that.  Jean would be amongst them, and she could not have helped
looking, and--and to have watched him go and know that it was for the
last time, would have been but to torture herself beyond her strength.

She was very tired, for still they were kept standing there for so
long, long a time, until her arms too ached, and the child grew leaden
in its weight.  Then the woman took the baby back again, and said
something that Marie-Louise could not understand--but the touch of the
brown hand as it patted gratefully on her arm brought a quick mist to
her eyes, because it was human, a human touch, and out of all the
strangeness around her, out of her loneliness it seemed so priceless a
thing to win.

And then there came harsh, strident commands, and the press around her,
carrying her with it, began to surge forward; and presently she found
herself inside the shed on the pier--and then it was like the deck of
the ship again, for she stood and waited so long and so interminably.
Why did they still have to wait?  It could not be here that one must be
examined before one could go out into those streets whose rumble and
noise was louder now!  Some one on board, a man who knew a few words of
French, who had made the voyage before, had told her that every one
must be examined; only he had said it was in a vast hall where there
were two big American flags that hung out over it from the gallery, and
that men sat at high desks at the end of long rows of benches, and that
one was towed to it in droll-looking barges that had two decks and were
all closed in like arks.  So it could not be here--that place!  And
then, more attentive to the details about her, she remembered the
_octroi_ when she had entered Paris from Bernay-sur-Mer.  One's things
too must be examined--and she opened her bundle until one of the men
with uniforms should have come and looked at it.

After that, she waited again; and then she was carried forward once
more with the movement of those about her; and, passing out of the
shed, was crowded onto a barge such as the one that the man on the ship
had described to her.

And then here again they waited; for all these people could not get on
one barge, even though it held so many and was so closely packed--and
there were other barges to be filled.  She could not see very much, for
she was in the centre of the crowd on the barge's upper deck, and could
only occasionally obtain a glimpse through the little windows that were
in rows on each side--but, at last, she could tell by the motion that
they had started.

There did not seem to be quite so much talking, or chattering, or
confusion now.  It was as though, hanging over all these people, had
come a subdued sense of disquiet and trepidation, the sense of some
ordeal to be faced, vaguely grasped, save that it loomed ominously, an
unknown, perhaps impassable barrier erected against the fulfilment of
their hopes; and men and women alike were nervously beginning to handle
the white cards with the big red figures on them, which every one had
attached to his or her clothing.

Marie-Louise found herself involuntarily doing the same--staring at the
little punch-holes along the bottom edge of the card that the doctor on
the ship had put there, one for each day.  And there was her name
written there at the top--"Marie-Louise Bernier."  And underneath it,
"Paris"--for she had given that as her last residence, because in this
new country none was to know that she had come from Bernay-sur-Mer.
For who could tell what these people here might not do?  They might
write to Bernay-sur-Mer, and then all her efforts would have been in
vain, for some one in Bernay-sur-Mer would write to Father Anton,
and--the card dropped from her fingers, and dangled by its string from
the button of her blouse.

The hot, scalding tears were in her eyes again.  Memories!  Always
memories!

On the faces of those around her, so many of them anxious now, was
written the question that lips in so many different languages were
whispering to each other.

"Will they let me in?  What will they do?  Will they let me in?  Will
they let me in?"

Liberty--for them!  Yes, they would go in, as she would go in--and some
of them, perhaps many of them, would find what they had sought.  But
she--even here in this strange country, where she could understand no
single word that was spoken, where, surely, now that Jean was gone
again, there would be nothing, no familiar scenes to come to her to
revive those memories--could she find liberty in some day learning to
forget?

It did not seem so now, for it seemed as though all her strength, her
resistance had gone out from her that night in her struggle to send
Jean away, and that it had not come back again.  Why--oh, why had the
_bon Dieu_ sent Jean upon that ship?  It had been so cruelly hard
before!  It did not change anything that he was in the same country,
for he would not stay long, and the country was so many times bigger
than France that they were utterly separated, but it was making it so
hard to be brave now---so much harder--so much harder!  And then
suddenly she lifted her head proudly, even though the lips would still
quiver, and though the lashes of her eyes were still wet.  What was it,
that old and simple faith, that her Uncle Gaston in his rugged, honest
way had taught her?  Yes, the words came back, and they came now like a
benediction to send her on her way with hope and comfort--"to love God
and be never afraid."

She kept repeating that to herself all the rest of the way--until she
was leaving the barge again, and, with the hundreds of her
fellow-passengers, still so curious a sight to her in their many
costumes, began to file in through the doorway of a huge building that
was red-roofed and had towers.  And here, once inside, they went very
slowly at first, for they must pass between railings one at a time,
while the doctors looked at each in turn.  This frightened her a
little, but they did nothing more to her than to stamp her card; and
then, after that, there was a big, broad staircase--and then, as she
climbed to the top, the vast hall was before her, with its many rows of
benches, and its two great flags hanging out from the balcony, that the
man had told her about.

What a buzz of noise--so many voices; the constant, shuffling tread of
feet; the cry of an infant; the stir and movement of such a crowd of
people!  And the sounds, floating upward, seemed to form themselves
into a strange, humming echo that was forever swirling around and
around at the roof of the hall over the gallery.  It bewildered her.  A
man in uniform--there were so many men in uniform!--spoke to her.  She
did not understand; but somehow, nevertheless, she found herself seated
on one of the long benches that ran nearly the whole length of the hall.

For a little while she remained quiet, staring down at her bundle that
she had placed upon the floor.  And then, as her confusion and
bewilderment gradually passed away, she began to look around her.  She
had never imagined that any hall could be so big--it was bigger even
than that place with the marble staircase where she had seen the great
reception to Jean.  How many hundreds would it hold?  Still the people
who had been with her on the ship kept coming up the stairs, and still
the benches were not nearly filled!

She turned and looked in the other direction, to where, quite close to
her, for she was almost at the head of the line, an officer sat at a
high desk, with one of the passengers standing before him.  And there
were many of these desks, each with an officer seated at it, just as
many as there were rows of benches, for there was one at the head of
every line; and behind these there was an open space beneath the
gallery; and against the wall of the building there were some little
railed-off enclosures; and doors that were constantly opening and
shutting, one of which, at least, seemed to lead into a corridor; and,
too, there was another wide stairway, down which some of those who had
come with her were already passing.

Her eyes came back to the inspector at the head of her own line, and
she watched him eagerly, as he kept writing all the time he talked to
the man who stood in front of him.  It would be her turn in a moment.
What was he doing?  What was he saying?  And then, as she watched, the
man in front of the inspector swung a large, ungainly valise to his
shoulder, and passed behind the desk, and crossed the open space
beyond, and went down the stairs.

There was only one more now before her--another man.  Her heart began
to pound rapidly.  She was not afraid of the inspector at the desk; she
was not afraid that he would refuse to let her through--why should she
be?  It was not that--it was only that the moment had come now when she
was to go out into this new land, and face new conditions where even
the language was unknown to her, and--and begin her life over again.
It was only that this moment seemed so big with finality--the threshold
between the future and the past.

It was her turn now.  Mechanically she took up her bundle, and stepped
to the desk.  "To love God and be never afraid"--she was saying that to
herself again.

"Your name?" demanded the inspector.  He spoke in French, in quick
appreciation of her nationality.

"Marie-Louise Bernier," she answered in a low voice, her eyes on the
bundle in her arms.

"Your age?  And"--he added kindly--"do not be nervous."

She raised her eyes to smile gratefully back at him--and then, with a
cry that rang and rang again through the immense hall and stilled all
else to silence, she flung herself madly past the desk, and ran across
the open space behind it.

"_Jean!  Jean!  Jean!_"

A figure, grimy, dirty, disreputable, whose hands were manacled, rose,
with an answering cry, from within one of the railed-off enclosures.

"Jean!  Jean!"--she had reached him now, and was sobbing, clinging to
him.  "Jean--you--here!  These things on your wrists!  And your face is
so white, Jean!  Jean, Jean, what does it mean?  Jean--"

And then she was conscious of a rush of men, and hands were upon her
trying to tear her away--and then, with a strength that was greater,
that seemed to mock at the strength of all these hands that snatched at
her, she was whirled off her feet, and Jean, towering there in all his
great might, snarling like some beast at bay, was between her and the
others.

"_Let her alone_!"--Jean's steel-locked wrists and clenched hands were
raised above his head.  "Let her alone!"--his voice was hoarse, low
with a murderous fury.  "I'll kill, do you understand--with these"--he
shook the steel bracelets on his wrists--"I'll kill--the first
man--that tries to take her away!"

Before the white, livid face, the passion in the mighty, quivering
form, they fell back instinctively; and for an instant that tense,
bated silence fell again upon the hall--and then a child cried
peevishly--and then a voice spoke authoritatively.

She did not understand what was said; but she was clinging to Jean
again, and the crowd of men in uniform were going away, leaving only
one or two near them.

"What was it?  What did he say?" she asked wildly.

"That there must be something in common between us--and to bring us
both together before the special inquiry board," he answered
mechanically--and because he could not spread his hands apart, he laid
them, still trembling with the fury that had been upon him, both
together on her shoulder, and drew her to him.

It terrified her, the sight of those manacles on his wrists.  Why--why
were they there?  What were they going to do with him?  What was this
inquiry--was it to send him to prison?

"Jean, what is it?" she whispered piteously.  "What does it mean?  What
are they going to do with you?"

"I do not know," he said, and smiled at her.  "I only know that for a
little while at least you are here with me again."

"Jean--answer me!" she cried out in her fear.

"But I do not know what they will do," he said again.  "I am a
stowaway.  They caught me that night on the ship when I was trying to
find some place to sleep--and, _pardieu_, they were not too gentle
until one or two were hurt!--and then they made me work my passage in
the stokehole."

It seemed so hard to think!  Some wonder, that was a glorious wonder,
was in her heart.

"You--you did not go back, Jean; I--I thought you had gone back,
Jean"--it was as though she were telling, in a low, whispering way,
some great, glad, joyous thing to herself.  And then there came a
sudden whiteness to her face, but her head was lifted bravely until her
eyes met his.  "Jean, tell them!" she said steadily.  "You must tell
them now who you are.  Tell them, Jean, and they will let you go."

"Tell them now!" Jean cried--and shook his head, and drew his shoulders
back.  "Tell them--_now_!  Did I tell them that night, Marie-Louise?
Look!"--he thrust out his handcuffed wrists before him.  "Is this not
proof, Marie-Louise, that I will never tell them, that I will never go
back--alone?  If the world is ever to hear of Jean Laparde again, it
will be because he has won back the only thing he has to live
for--you--you, Marie-Louise, my little Marie-Louise.  I told them my
name was Jacques Legault--and Jacques Legault I will always be until
you have made Jean Laparde live again, until--until--you are his
wife--as in God's sight you have been, Marie-Louise, since we were
little children, as in God's sight you were when I swore that oath to
Gaston as he died, as in God's sight you have been though I was a
traitor to that oath.  Look, Marie-Louise!  Look at these things again,
these irons on my wrists, are they not proof that there is nothing now,
that I will have nothing, that I will know nothing but your love?  Ah,
Marie-Louise, once you said that I belonged to France, and you bade me
go alone and work; and I forgot France, and love, and there was only
Jean Laparde, and I forgot the God that gave the gift--but now,
Marie-Louise, look up into my face and answer, shall I work this time
for France and you and love, or shall I never work again?
Marie-Louise, see"--his voice broke in its passionate pleading--"they
are coming!  Marie-Louise, do you not know now that there is only
you--only you, Marie-Louise--for always?"

She did not answer.  They were taking Jean, and taking her somewhere
now.  She walked almost blindly.  Jean had not gone back that night,
and--and those things on his wrists were proof that--that he would
never go back.  Proof that, whatever might happen now, whatever he was
going now to face, whatever they might do with him, the choice he had
made that night was made for all his life; that she, even if she would,
could not alter it now--proof that his love was so great and wonderful
and strong and big that nothing could bend or break or shatter
it--proof it was a love so pure that it had risen in sacrifice so high
as to make a glory of the years when he had forgotten it!  Yes; she
knew now!  Her heart, and her soul, and the _bon Dieu_ told her so!
What was it he had said that night on the ship--that even in those
years she had been his inspiration?  Yes; she knew that, too, for she
had seen it, and others had seen it.  It was true!  And he had said
that he would never work again--never do that great, wondrous work of
his again--alone--without her--never return to it--without her.  And he
had said that the _grand monde_ that once had taken her place in his
life, the _grand monde_ in which she could have no part, was of the
past now--the past to which he would never return--no matter what she
did or said now--to which he would never return.

They were in a corridor; and from the corridor they entered a room,
where there were three men seated in a row at desks.  These men began
to talk amongst themselves; but it was only when an interpreter, who
was also present, put questions to Jean that she could understand
anything.

"To love God and be never afraid"--she tried to think of that again,
tried to say it over and over.  But she _was_ afraid.  There was
terror; and, besides terror, there was that new wonder in her
soul--and, mingling, they brought confusion upon her, and at first even
the words in her own tongue conveyed no meaning, and possessed for her
only an unnatural sense of familiarity.  And then, in snatches, she
began to catch the drift of what was going on around her--a stowaway in
any case was almost invariably deported ... undesirable for other
reasons ... murderous assault upon one of the crew when he was
discovered ... his outburst of fury and threat of attack upon the
officers only a few moments ago ... medical examination ... stab wound
in side barely healed ... a vicious character....

The wound!  The wound in Jean's side!  She had forgotten that!  It
brought a sharp cry to her lips, that caused them all to turn and look
at her.  But she did not care.  What if they looked!  She was looking
at Jean--looking at the gaunt, white, haggard-faced giant, who smiled
and shrugged his shoulders to every question that was put to him.  His
wound--barely healed!  What must those days and nights of torturing,
brutal work in the stokehole of that ship have meant to him--and she
had thought so pitiful a thing as an hour of the coarse food, the
paltry misery of the steerage, would have made him falter and regret!

They kept on questioning him--but she was not listening now.  Her soul
was whispering to her: "It is Jean; it is Jean; Jean that you love;
Jean that you have loved all your life, all your life, who has done
this for you.  It is Jean who has lived through black hours where only
a courage and a heroic love, so splendid and so true that it will last
while life will last, has kept him from the single word, the single act
that could so easily have brought back to him again everything in the
world--save you."  Her eyes were filling with tears.  It was
Jean--Jean--Jean--who had done this for her.  Jean who stood there with
irons upon his wrists--for her.  Jean who had--

"Who is this woman?" the interpreter demanded abruptly of Jean.  "Is
she any relation to you?"

There was no answer--save only in Jean's eyes, as he turned and looked
at her.

"Tell him, Marie-Louise," Jean's eyes seemed to say.  "Tell him,
Marie-Louise, for it is you who must answer now--for always."

"You, then," the interpreter asked, addressing her.  "Are you any
relation to this man?"

She felt her face grow very white.

"You must tell the truth," the interpreter cautioned sharply.  "It is
evident on the face of it, from what happened out there in the hall,
that there is something between you.  Tell the truth for your own sake.
This man is to be deported, and he will not be allowed to come back.
Do you understand that?  If he is any relation to you, say so--unless
you want to be separated.  Well?"

Separated!  Marie-Louise raised her head a little--and looked at
Jean--and at the interpreter--and at the officers.

"I"--oh, it was true; true as life was true; true as love was true;
true in God's sight, as Jean had said it was true; true because all
through the years to come, through the sunshine and the storm and until
death it would be true!--"I--I am his wife," she said.

"Marie-Louise!"

She heard Jean breathe her name, she heard the half sob upon his lips,
she felt the cold steel of the handcuffs touch her wrist as his hand
found and closed on hers--but she was looking only at the officers,
hanging, her heart stilled in suspense, upon their every act, trying to
read their faces where she could not understand their words.  And then,
involuntarily, because they told her nothing, because the seconds as
they passed were as eternities, she flung out her hands to the
interpreter.

"What are they saying?  What are they saying?" she cried imploringly.

But it was Jean who answered--and his voice was lifted as though in
song, radiant, triumphant, deathless.

"You are to be sent back to France, Marie-Louise, Marie-Louise--with
me."




-- XIII --

DAWN

Strange noises!  The myriad voices of the ship talking one to
another--the creak and grind of girders and stringers; the grunting,
faintly from far above, of the wooden superstructure; the whine and
complaint of the deck-beams as the vessel lurched to the sea; the
sibilant hiss and whir of the racing screws lifting from the water; the
swift infuriated response of the unfettered engines, chattering
angrily, as it were, in wrath for the scurvy trick played upon them;
the eternal dull, moaning throb, throb, throb from everywhere, that
seemed finally to absorb these voices unto itself and stand as
spokesman for them all.  Strange noises--a medley of pain, of travail,
of strain, human almost in its outcry, seeking relief from unendurable
effort and distress.

For days and days they had talked like that, and Jean had
listened--listened through the watches of the day and night, listened
through the hours of his own toil and pain, and the cursings of the
raw-boned, wizened apparition that came and went through the murky
gloom of the bunker, and croaked continually like some ill-omened thing
for coal, coal, coal, lifting a brutal fist at times to enforce the
words.  But, too, as he had listened, through the plaint of this
strange medley had come the lilt, underlying all, of another refrain
that all these voices seemed to sing--a refrain that found a deeper
echo in his own soul, that seemed to make the kin between him and these
inanimate things the closer, a refrain of hope, a refrain in which lay
immortal happiness.

"In five days ... in three days ... in one day more we shall reach
France, France, France--and the end of strife--France--and the end of
strife."

And now that refrain was changed again, and it made his heart leap, and
he laughed out in pure joy, as he swept the great sweat beads from his
forehead.

"To-day--to-day--_to-day_ we shall reach France--reach France--reach
France!"

Over yonder through the murk of the dimly lighted bunker, through the
swirling coal dust, another trimmer shovelled his barrow full of coal,
and then the wheel _clacked, clacked_ over the steel deck plates, and
steel rang against steel as the barrow was whipped over on its side to
send its load tumbling down the chute to the boiler-room below--but
Jean's own barrow lay idly for a moment beside the black, mountainous
heap of coal, and his shovel hung idly in his hand.

"To-day--to-day!  France, and the end of strife!"--how joyously the
voices trilled in his ears!  "France, and life to begin anew!
France--and Marie-Louise!  France, and--"

"You damned loafer!" snarled a voice beside him--and quick, with the
words, a stinging blow fell upon Jean's face.

It was the raw-boned, wizened engineer--the man above all others who
was responsible for his, Jean's, presence there in the bunker again on
this return voyage to France--the man who had made of the voyage a
living hell.  Marie-Louise's money, her attempt to pay his passage back
and save him from this had counted for nothing--against this man.  Two
trimmers had deserted almost on the hour of sailing--he, Jean, was
lawful prey--a stowaway being deported--and there had been a vicious
smirk of satisfaction on the man's face, reminiscent of Jean's
unruliness that night on the outward voyage when he had been
discovered, as the engineer had claimed him for one of the vacancies.

The shovel clanged on the steel plates of the deck as it dropped from
Jean's hands.  He whirled like a flash, and, grasping the engineer by
the shoulders, lifted the other off his feet, and held him as powerless
as in the clutch of an iron vise; held the other off at arms' length in
his mighty strength to wriggle impotently; held the other there--and
laughed out with that wondrous surge of joy that was upon him.

"I will not hurt you!" cried Jean--and laughed in a big, glad way.  "I
am too happy!  See, I will not hurt you!  I am too happy!  Do you know
what it is to be happy?  To love everything--to have your heart
singing, singing all the time!  Ah, if you could but know!  But, go
now--for see, I will not hurt you!  I am too happy!"--and laughing
again, he released the man.

The engineer stood for an instant gazing at Jean.  Happy!  This great
giant of a man, in torn clothes, the sweat rolling furrows down the
grime-smeared face--this man, a stowaway on the voyage out--this man,
deported from America--this man, forced to work here on the voyage
back, who was to be treated, and had been treated like a dog--this
man--_happy_!  Happy!  Was the man mad?  The engineer, muttering in his
amazement, wondering and dazed and awed at the strength that had made
of him a puny thing, edged away, and disappeared in the gloom.

Two little incandescents burned yellow from the stanchions
overhead--there was no other light.  There was nothing but the choking
swirl of the coal dust, the rasp of the shovels, the clack of the
barrow wheels, the clang as they were dumped--and the voices that told
of France, and life, and love, and joy again.

"To-day--to-day!"--how the words rang in his heart and soul and mind
like some silver-throated clarion call!

To-day, when the shores of France should loom in sight, the last of all
barriers between Marie-Louise and himself would be swept away forever.
There, on Ellis Island, they had kept him and Marie-Louise apart; and
here on the ship again, the same ship that had brought them
out--"guests" of the company that was forced by the government to
return them to France--they had seen each other little.  For, though it
had not been as on the outward voyage when he was held a prisoner and
closely watched even when he was off duty, and though he was now at
least as free as any of the crew, it had only been at odd moments
snatched here and there, usually in the early morning hours while it
was still dark and he had gone off watch to the steerage deck, and she
had come up from below to meet him, that he had seen Marie-Louise--that
was all, the very little when their souls cried out for so much, that
they had been together.

But what did it matter now?  To-day--to-day all that was to be ended!
To-day--how his heart leaped, and his being thrilled at the
thought!--to-day they were to be together for always, to-day was to
know the fulfilment of their love.

And then, too, there was another joy--the joy of a new and beautiful
thing that had come into his life.  The joy, pure, without alloy,
unsmirched by sordid aims--the joy of work.  How it brought a feverish
excitement, how his fingers tingled for the touch of clay, how he
yearned to give expression to that with which his soul was now aflame,
the statue of dreams, real before him now, that mighty picture, that
splendid allegory that should tell his beloved France that Jean Laparde
lived again--but lived a new Laparde, and, if the good God willed it
so, worthy in a humble way of the great gift that was his, worthy in a
glad, tender way of the love that, so steadfast and so true, so
unselfish and so pure, had saved him from himself.  Yes, it had come to
him--come to him at last, the base of that statue that he had never
been able to see before.  It had come to him here in the gloom, and
struggle, and sweat, and toil of this miserable coal bunker; come to
him, leaving him to stand a chastened man before the picture that was
held up, perfect in every detail, before his mind's eye for him to gaze
upon, leaving him to tremble with emotion at the thought that he should
give it to the world to see.

It was a secret yet from Marie-Louise--a secret that was to be told
to-night.  There were to be just they two--and--yes, Father Anton, who
would be there to bless them--to know.  No one else, least of all
Monsieur and Mademoiselle Bliss, who would in that case come hurrying
back from America.  No one else to know that he lived until the dream
statue was done.  There was the dream statue to make, and then all
France, and all the world, if it would, should know that Jean Laparde
still lived; for then the world would understand why the Jean Laparde
it knew--had died.

He filled his barrow, emptied it, and filled it again--and worked
on--and, strangest sound of all, strange indeed for that dark, joyless
place, as he worked, he sang.

Came at last, faintly, the four double strokes of the ship's bell.
Eight bells--four o'clock in the morning--the watch was ended.  Jean
handed his barrow and shovel to his relief, and, mounting the
succession of steep, iron-runged perpendicular ladders, climbed upward
from the ship's black depths, and made his way to the steerage deck.

It was dark here--with the darkness before the dawn.  A fresh wind was
blowing, and he put on his jacket; and, leaning over the side, watched
the racing waves, and laughed at the buoyant lift of the deck beneath
his feet, and threw back his head to drink into his lungs for the first
time in many hours the sweet, fresh, God-given air.

"Marie-Louise!  To-day--Marie-Louise!  Marie-Louise!" his heart was
saying.

And presently she came along the deck, and her hand stole into his.  It
was too dark to see her face; but her hair, truant in the wind, swept
his cheek, and close to him he could feel her heart beat against his
own.  And as he held her there, there came upon him, softly, like some
sacred presence, moving the soul of him with an holy joy, the wonder of
her, and the great, immeasurable, priceless worth of the love she had
given him.

"Marie-Louise," he whispered tenderly.  "Your lips, _ma bien-aimée_!"

And in the darkness she raised her face to his, and he kissed her--and
suddenly he found his eyes were wet.  Glad tears they were; and yet,
too, a pledge between himself and God that he would hold her always as
he held her now, her life and happiness his dearest trust--a pledge
that in itself asked grace and pardon in contrite penitence for that
pledge of other days that he had broken.

His arms were around her.  God, the sorrow and the misery he had
brought to her, who had so freely laid aside her own happiness that
he--that he--  He drew her closer still.

"Marie-Louise, are you happy?" he cried out, and it was his soul that
spoke, yearning, pleading fiercely for the assurance that meant all in
life to him now, the assurance that alone could stand, radiant and
thankful, where before, in keen, bitter pangs of remorse, had stood the
memories of the past--of her betrayal.  "Marie-Louise, are you happy?"
he cried out again.

"I did not know that one could be so happy, Jean," she said softly--and
her hand lifted to touch his face, and linger there, smoothing the hair
back from his forehead.

They were silent for a little while in each other's arms--a deep peace,
a quiet thankfulness in their hearts.

And then Jean spoke again.

"Look, Marie-Louise!" he said, and pointed out far over the waters to
the horizon line ahead.  "It is the dawn.  _Our_ dawn, Marie-Louise.
The dawn of the day when we shall be together always."

Grey it was in the east; faint and timorous streaks of light that
seemed like skirmishers flung out in tentative attack upon the massed
blackness of the night.

Her hands tightened about him.

"To-day!  Oh, Jean!  It is like a dream--like a wonderful dream that
the _bon Dieu_ has brought to us."

He drew her head to his shoulder.  Presently, when in the east that
greyness should have grown pink and golden with awakening day, he would
drink in the pure, glorious beauty of the sweet, chaste face, look into
the dark, brave, tender eyes and read in her soul the happiness that
God had restored to them; but now he could only hold her close and feel
the lithe young form against his own, and feel her heart throb against
his breast.

"A dream, little one, that shall always last," he said.  "Ah,
Marie-Louise, it is our dawn, our day, the beginning of a new life,
_chérie_, where there shall be only love--our love, yours and mine, the
love of old friends, of those we love, the love of work--ah, you shall
see what that will be!"  His voice thrilled suddenly.  "You shall see,
for now Bidelot shall have that 'touch' he asked for--for now I know!
I know!  It was you I modelled, Marie-Louise--your face, your form--and
they were perfect, beautiful; but I was blind to what was most
beautiful of all!  I modelled only features--and I forgot the soul, for
I had forgotten love, and I could not see the dearer things.  I forgot
the soul that should soften so tenderly and refine the courage and the
resolution and the purity of that dear face of yours and make nobility
divine.  I forgot--"

"Jean!"--her fingers were laid tightly upon his lips.  "Jean, you must
not say such things!  Jean, Jean, I am so far from that--so far from
that!"

He could just see her face now in the growing light--see the eyes shine
through a mist of happy tears, see those perfect lips quiver in their
smile, as she shook her head.

"But you shall see!" he told her eagerly.  "A little while in
Paris--ah, Marie-Louise, that is a secret that I have for you!--a
little while there, and then you shall see!  And all France shall
see--and France shall tell you that it is so!  Ah, Marie-Louise,
perhaps some day they will forget Jean Laparde; but France shall always
remember one who is worthier far, and in that one see its hope, its
inspiration and its glory, for France shall never forget--Marie-Louise!"

She had slipped from his arms.  Her face was full of wonder, and upon
it fell the soft glow of light that now was tinging the eastern sky.
How pure, how brave, how beautiful she was!  How love shone in the eyes
that were like Heaven's stars; how the soft light seemed to caress her
face and rejoice in the radiant happiness that was there, a happiness
that even her wondering bewilderment for the moment seemed to enhance!
How the strong, young form swung free and lithesome to the lifting
deck, and found a wondrous joy in its own glorious virility!

"Jean, what do you mean?" she said breathlessly.

"You shall know!" he laughed, and laughed because there was only joy
and gladness in all the world--in the waves that tumbled and frolicked
and played, and tossed their white manes at each other and the ship; in
the breeze that sang merrily its way along on its busy errand into the
great everywhere; in the vibrant throb of the mighty ship, in that
spokesman's voice--for it was to be to-day--to-day!  "You shall know,
Marie-Louise--to-night, when Father Anton is there to hear, and has
blessed us, and made Marie-Louise my little wife!  And then that little
while in Paris that you will understand--and then--_home_!  Ah,
Marie-Louise, can you not see it now--the blue water, blue with the
wonderful colour that only God can make, and the white beach where we
played when we were little children, and the boats, Marie-Louise, and
the brave, true, loyal friends!  Home, Marie-Louise, home, home,
home--to Bernay-sur-Mer!  Ah, is not God good?  We shall go home, _ma
bien-aimée_--and there we shall live, and there I shall work for you,
and France, and love, and there old Bidelot and those who really love
the things we do shall come at times to make us proud and happy!  Ah,
it will be a _grand monde_, Marie-Louise, a _grand monde_ of wealth and
riches, and a very proud _grand monde_, careful of those who shall have
the entree there--for it shall be a _grand monde_ where you, my little
Marie-Louise, are queen, a _grand monde_ of love and happiness."

Purple and golden and pink and crimson was the east--and over the
horizon rim rose the sun.  And it mounted higher, and the dawn was
gone, and the day had come.

"Look!" he said suddenly.

And a cry rose to Marie-Louise's lips; and her eyes grew dim and misty
again until she could no longer see.

"It is the land!  It is France!" she whispered.

It was light now, men and women were moving about the steerage deck, he
could no longer hold her in his arms; but, standing there at the ship's
side, her hand was tightly clasped in his.

There were glad words on Jean's lips:

"It is France, Marie-Louise--and home."




-- XIV --

THE STATUE OF DREAMS

Four months had passed.  The spring had come.  France mourned for Jean
Laparde.  Old Bidelot shook his grizzled head, and pushed away, with a
curiously reproachful motion of his hand, the mass of sketches and
designs that lay upon the desk before him.  If France grieved for the
loss of one of her most brilliant sons, the great critic of France
grieved besides for the loss of a personal friend that he had loved.
Of these competitive designs that he had been appointed to judge for
the statue with which France was to commemorate Jean Laparde--none
would do!  Not one!  Not one, but was so far from the genius of Jean's
own work that there seemed something mocking and incongruous in the
thought that it should aspire to perpetuate and typify the work of the
master-sculptor who was gone!  Not one would do--and meanwhile they
besieged him, those who had submitted their designs, to cast Jean's
mantle upon them!  They came at all hours; they waited interminably on
his door-step for him to return; they buttonholed him on the streets
and in the cafés to urge their claims and to explain the allegory of
their conceptions, lest some subtle beauty in their work might have
escaped his eye!  One would not think they would do that--eh?  That it
was not dignified?  No?  Well--there was the mantle of Jean Laparde!

"_Mon Dieu_!" sighed Bidelot heavily--and suddenly raised his head at a
timid knocking upon the door.  Here was another of them then, no doubt!
He had been wrong to let his servant take the afternoon, and leave his
apartment so unguarded that his very door was at their mercy!  "Well,
come!" he called out, querulously--but the next instant he had risen,
and was smiling, as he extended his hand.  It was Father Anton.  "Ah,
Father Anton!" he cried.  "This is a pleasure!  This is a pleasure
indeed!  I do not often see you these days!  As a matter of fact--let
me see--not since Monsieur Bliss went away to America, and the evenings
at his house were at an end."

"That is so," agreed Father Anton.  "But then, I have been very busy;
and besides, for a little while, I was in Bernay-sur-Mer."

"_Tiens_!  So!  But, tell me, what is the news from Monsieur Bliss?
When will he return?"

"I do not know," Father Anton replied.  "He has said nothing about it
in his letters; but I have a letter to write him to-day, that may
perhaps bring him back at once."

"Then write it, my dear Father Anton--write it, by all means!"  Bidelot
burst out with a vehemence that, if exaggerated, was at least sincere,
as he waved his hand helplessly toward the desk.  "I am in despair!  I
have been on the point of writing Monsieur Bliss myself."

Father Anton's eyes followed the direction of the gesture, and fixed
interrogatively on the desk.

"The competitive designs," explained Bidelot.  "None are worthy!  It is
tragic!"

But now Father Anton smiled, and shook his head, and laid his hand on
Bidelot's arm.

"But Jean still lives," he said, in his gentle way.  "Jean is not dead."

"It is the Church that speaks," old Bidelot answered.  "I know what you
mean.  That is all very well, and it is also true in a material sense
that men like Jean Laparde do not die; but what of the work that he had
yet to do?  What of that, Monsieur le Curé?  Will you say that his work
was finished?  Then I, who went there every day, who knew so well, who
looked for that final master-touch that was yet to come--I tell you,
no!  He had still his masterpiece before him!  And then, with that
achieved"--the caustic old critic's hand swept a dozen sketches from
the desk to the floor--"bah, he would have no need of these in any
case!--but with that achieved, then, I tell you then, that"--his hands
dropped to his sides, and he shrugged his shoulders.  "Ah, well, I had
thought to see it before I died; and yet I, who am an old man, whose
work is over, am still alive, and Jean Laparde is dead.  Will you
explain that, Monsieur le Curé?"

Father Anton's smile now was one of kindly amusement.

"But Jean is not dead," he said again.  "It is to tell you that, that I
have come."

"Hey!" cried Bidelot.  He stared at Father Anton in startled and amazed
incredulity.  "Hey!" he cried hoarsely, and grasped with both hands at
Father Anton's shoulders.  "What is this you say?  Are you mad,
Monsieur le Curé?  Not dead!  You say that Jean Laparde is not dead!
It is impossible!  It is inconceivable!"

"And yet," said Father Anton, still smiling, "since I married him at
the studio--eh?  And since I am here now from him with a message for
you!"

"Married!  At the studio!"  Old Bidelot gazed wildly around him.  "My
hat!" he ejaculated excitedly.  "Where is my hat?  I will go at once!
At once!  Jean--at the studio!  It is not possible--but I will go!"

"Yes," Father Anton nodded, "we will go to the studio, for that is what
Jean wanted you to do.  But Jean himself is no longer there."

Old Bidelot, already halfway to the door, stopped abruptly and whirled
around.

"Not there!  Then--then what?  He is not dead!  He is married!  He is
at the studio!  He is not at the studio!  I do not understand!  I
understand nothing!"

"I will explain it all to you," Father Anton told him soothingly.  "But
let us go.  It will take time to tell it, for it is a long story, and
we can talk on the way."

"Yes--well, then!  Well, then!  But make haste!"  Bidelot dragged at
the skirt of Father Anton's _soutane_, and led the way from the
apartment, exclaiming as he went.  Then, as they reached the street, he
caught Father Anton's arm and shook it almost as he would a refractory
child's.  "Now, then!  Now, then--tell me!"

"But be calm, Monsieur Bidelot; I pray you to be calm!" expostulated
Father Anton gently.  "See"--stepping out--"I will tell you as we walk
along.  Well, then--listen!  One night, a little over four months ago,
Hector came to my rooms in such excitement that I thought he was ill.
He told me that Jean had come back.  Like you, I could not believe it.
I hurried there--I ran.  It was true!  It was Jean--not like the Jean
that went away; but like the Jean when you first saw him, the Jean of
Bernay-sur-Mer.  And with him was--ah, but what amazement!--was my
little Marie-Louise--no, Jean's Marie-Louise, for I married them there
that night, and--"

"But," interrupted Bidelot, gesticulating with his hat, for he had
forgotten to put it on, "but, still I do not understand!  Over four
months ago!  And since then?  Where has he been since then?"

"He has been working there at the studio in secret," Father Anton
answered.

"Working!  Ah!  Let us hurry--faster then!" urged Bidelot eagerly.
"But why has he gone away?  Why did he not wait?  But
to-morrow--eh--to-morrow, he will be back to-morrow?"

"No," said Father Anton slowly.  "I do not think Jean will come back
any more to Paris."

"Monsieur le Curé," spluttered Bidelot, halting suddenly in the middle
of the street, "what is the matter with you?  Enough of these riddles!
Jean not come any more to Paris!  I can understand nothing!"

"But you would understand," said Father Anton patiently, "if only you
would let me tell you.  See now, listen--it is the story as Jean told
it to me that night"--and, as he took old Bidelot's arm, and they
walked on again, Father Anton, smiling sometimes radiantly, fumbling
sometimes with his spectacles, told of the old days in Bernay-sur-Mer,
of Marie-Louise, of how she came to Paris, of how Jean "died" that
night at sea, and of how they came to France again.  And they were at
the studio and mounting the steps, as Father Anton ended.

"And so," he said, "and so, that night I married Jean and Marie-Louise.
And what days after that!  If you could but have seen Jean in the joy
of his work, and Marie-Louise there beside him!  And I must needs go to
Bernay-sur-Mer to buy back Marie-Louise's house without her knowing it,
and see to the building of an _atelier_ to be added to it.  And--it is
there they went this morning--to live."

And Bidelot was very quiet now, and his eyes were wet.

"I understand," he said, as Father Anton opened the door with a key.
"But"--shaking his head a little--"even in Bernay-sur-Mer Jean will be
famous, and the world will follow to Bernay-sur-Mer."

"That is perhaps true, and it would be a sad thing if it were
otherwise," said Father Anton, with his rare, grave smile, "for there
is a pride that is pure, and a joy like no other joy in the tribute
that is paid to one for work well done.  And if the world follows to
Bernay-sur-Mer, it can be only to the life that it will find there, the
life in which Marie-Louise has her glad place, a life that the world,
as you speak of it, will never mould or change."

They passed in across the hall, and entered the salon, and walked down
its length to the portières that hid the _atelier_ from view--but here
Bidelot paused.

"Wait!" he said.  "Tell me one thing more.  Why has Jean stayed here in
Paris to work in secret like this for all these months since he came
back?"

"I think you will find the answer here," said Father Anton--and,
reaching out his hand, drew the portières quietly apart.

And Bidelot, with a low, sudden cry, stepped forward into the
_atelier_--and after that stood still, and neither spoke nor moved.

Two life-sized figures were before him--a woman, and a man.  And the
woman, a fishergirl, stood as on a perilous, wave-swept ledge, and
leaning forward was stretching out her hands; and at her feet, from
storm-lashed waters that swirled around him, rose the head and
shoulders of the man, one hand clasped in both of hers, the fingers of
the other clawing into the crevice of the rock, the muscles of the bare
arm, where the shirt had been torn away, standing out like whip-cords
as he drew himself to safety.  And as Bidelot gazed, the studio, the
surroundings, all were gone.  Alone those figures--as in some mighty
power that was supreme, that knew naught but itself, but in itself knew
all of triumph, of defeat, of struggle, of glory, of undying love, of
victory, that knew the sadness and the joys of life, its empty things
and its immortal truth!  And in the wind-wrapt, wave-wet clothes that
clung about the fishergirl, disclosing in pure, chaste beauty the
strong young limbs and form, in the torn and bleeding shoulders of the
man, buffeted, near spent, there seemed to fall upon the studio the
darkness of blackened skies, to come the roar of waters in turbulent
unrest, the play of lightning, the roll of thunder, now ominous, now
dying muttering away--and all was storm and battle and dismay and
death.  And then, as sunshine breaking through the clouds--a glad and
perfect triumph--victory!  It was in the woman's face that was rigidly
set with high, unfaltering courage, yet softened as by some divine
touch with a wondrous tenderness until the beautiful lips, as they
panted in the struggle, smiled, and the brave, fearless eyes held trust
and love; it was in the man's face, shining like some radiant glory
from out the drawn and haggard features, as though the physical
evidence of the torture and pain of one who had been near to death were
lost in the joy and wonder of life regained--is though his soul were in
his face.

It was long before Bidelot spoke.

"There are no words," he said.  "It is what I dreamed and hoped that I
might see."

"It is Marie-Louise--his wife," said Father Anton softly.  "It is his
statue of dreams, with the base at last that he could never see before."

There were tears upon old Bidelot's cheeks.

"I understand," he said.  "It is Jean himself."  He moved closer to the
figures, and stood silent again.  "It is a priceless thing," he said
presently.  "It is not himself alone; it is the womanhood of France,
pure in her courage and her love, immortal in her sacrifice, that is
the inspiration, the life, the anchorage, the guiding star, the hope of
France itself!  Ah, my friend"--the grizzled head was high, the eyes
were shining with pride and a glad excitement--"I speak for this for
France.  All must see it--the France as yet unborn, the children when
we are dead and gone who shall serve their country better for the
masterpiece of Jean Laparde and the story that it tells.  I go
to-night!  I go to-night to Bernay-sur-Mer to Jean--to speak for this
for France!"

Father Anton made no answer; but he stooped and from the pedestal of
the group removed the cloths that, as though they had fallen in a
careless heap when the figures had been uncovered, were bedded around
it.  He was smiling through misty eyes, as he stood up again.

"It was the message that I had for you," he said.  "Read!"

And Bidelot, bending forward, read the words that were carved there in
the clay:


  TO FRANCE--FROM JEAN LAPARDE




THE END









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Belovéd Traitor, by Frank L. Packard

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BELOVÉD TRAITOR ***

***** This file should be named 34034-8.txt or 34034-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/0/3/34034/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
</doc>
<doc id="file28566136" filename="53001-0.txt" parent_folder="History" url="https://www.gutenberg.org/files/53001/53001-0.txt">
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Magic of Spain, by Aubrey F.G. Bell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Magic of Spain

Author: Aubrey F.G. Bell

Release Date: September 7, 2016 [EBook #53001]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAGIC OF SPAIN ***




Produced by Josep Cols Canals, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)











                          THE MAGIC OF SPAIN




                               THE MAGIC
                               OF SPAIN

                         BY AUBREY F. G. BELL

                        Or vous aurez loisir
                        Cheminant en Espagne
                        Bien que maintes montagnes
                        Il vous faudra monter.
                             _Pilgrims’ Song._

                  LONDON: JOHN LANE, THE BODLEY HEAD,
                 NEW YORK: JOHN LANE COMPANY. MCMXII.


         WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BECCLES.




NOTE


This is rather a collection of stray notes on Spain than a connected
study--of notes from many pleasant hours of Spanish literature and
travel, but perhaps of too individual an interest to appear without some
apology. No reference will be found to those great social and political
problems which disturb Spanish life. To fill the idler moments of a
Spanish holiday, and possibly to help the reader to feel that “parfum du
terroir” which pervades Spain, is the unambitious object of these pages.
Better still, if he turns from them in dissatisfaction to authoritative
writers on Spanish life and letters, and to the magic-land of Spanish
literature itself. For permission to reprint some of these short essays
in slightly altered form the author has to thank the Editors of the
_Morning Post_, the _Outlook_, and the _Queen_.




PREFACE


It is not easy in a few words to account for the strange Oriental spell
that Spain has exercised over many minds nor to explain the potency of
its attraction. For indeed the great Peninsula possesses a special spice
and flavour. It has not the immemorial culture of Italy, nor the
pleasant smiling landscapes of France with her green meadows and crystal
streams. The old Iberia, that _dura tellus_, has a peculiar raciness.
Its colour is often harsh and crude; many of its districts are barren
and discomfortable. The bleak and rocky uplands and the ragged sierra
ridges cut the country into sharp divisions and cause it to be thinly
and variously populated. On those uplands the breath of the wind is
often icy and the sun strikes with a biting force. Great parched and
desolate plains extend treeless and unprotected two thousand feet above
the sea. The villages at distant intervals are of the colour of the
soil, and scarcely to be distinguished from a mass of yellow-brown
rocks. Morning and evening a string of mules may be seen outlined on the
horizon, for the peasants set out in bands to till their distant fields;
or a shepherd with his flock of sheep, or goats, relieves the strange
monotony of this dust-laden windy desert. Nothing could be sadder or
less harmonious than the peasants’ harsh and strident singing, the very
peculiarity of which has, however, a piquancy and charm. Hard too is
their language, with its clean gutturals, far rougher and manlier than
the musical sister-tongue of Italy. All points to a like conclusion,
that this is no country of comfort and soft languorous delight, but of a
quaint and forcible originality, where the most jaded mind may be braced
and inspirited and find a fresher and more stirring life.

In Spain the sharpness of contrasts precludes any feeling of weariness
or satiety. There are regions of luxuriant growth and African sun
bounded by mountains of eternal snow. Through the plain a river glides
among orange groves and grey olives; in the shaded _patios_ of the city
silver fountains keep the air cool and fresh, and on the coldest night
in winter the temperature is still some degrees above the
freezing-point. Yet here, in the most fiery heat of summer, we may lift
up our eyes to the hills and look on the snowy sierra against the deep
blue of the sky; and if a shower, in this region of little rain, falls
upon the low-lying districts, it adds but another coat of whiteness to
the neighbouring range. It is indeed a strange and fascinating land, a
_Land voll Sonnenschein_ and fierce blinding light, yet a land of
shrill, piercing blasts and icy air, a land of many various elements
both of climate and population. It is no wonder that its inhabitants are
of a character strongly individual and preserve the original Iberian
strain. A racy pithiness of speech is theirs. In no country are proverbs
more common, and a string of them can indeed form a peasant’s
conversation, pungent as the rosaries of red _piments_ that hang on the
balconies of farms.

It was in Spain that the rogue-story, the _novela de pícaros_,
originated, and the Spanish novelists of the last thirty years have
given free rein to the local types of various parts of Spain. Nowhere
has provincialism continued to be so clearly marked. In other countries
better communications have corrupted the local manners into a conformity
of excellence. In Spain the nature of the country, with its rough
mountain barriers and turbulent unnavigable rivers, still protects
originality and keeps the character of the provinces distinct, and the
native of Andalucía continues to despise the native of Galicia and to be
ridiculed by the native of Castille. This does not make for material
prosperity, but it constitutes a country of the picturesque and
unexpected, a country where imagination is not dead, and where the
artist and poet find their true home. Not the least attraction to them
perhaps is the Spanish improvidence and absence of method, and the gay
living from hand to mouth. An unwary traveller in the wilder districts
may easily find himself half-perishing from scarcity of food, and lost
in an intricate labyrinth of ways between far-distant villages. “A bad
thing, sirs, it is to have a lack of bread,” sang the poet of the
twelfth-century _Poema del Cid_. The hardy peasant of the poorer
regions lives scantily from day to day on the product of the niggard
soil, won by patient labour. The peasant in more fertile parts does not
necessarily fare better, but he labours magnificently less. The
deliberate method of prosperity and success is held in small esteem. The
mighty Empire of Spain was in fact the affair of a generation only. From
the time of Philip II. onwards the Spanish Empire might aptly be
compared with the Cid’s corpse, for, though by its prestige and the
favour of heaven it might continue to reap fresh victories, it was
nevertheless irrevocably dead and awaiting dissolution. And it is the
improvidence of Spain that has charmed the foreigner. For, eager as he
is to admire its poetic aspects, in his inmost soul he often regards
himself as incomparably superior, and hurries home to civilization with
a sheaf of curious details negligently gleaned.

The courteous Spaniard conceals his contempt for the foreigner, but were
he privileged to read the numerous sketches, scenes, and saunterings
published yearly of Spain, he would have some scope for legitimate
amusement. A faint remonstrance has indeed been heard in the Peninsula
against the idea of Spanish grandees lying in wait at dark corners to
rob a French journalist of his fortune. But mostly they are content to
let the foreigner continue in his ignorance. For stern and melancholy
Spain retains her secret, and is not to be won from her Oriental
impenetrable mystery by any wiles. Unchanging and impassive, her cities
seem to mock the stranger, and the roughness of the intervening
wildernesses discourages him. But he returns again and again to this
remote and mediæval country, that in his practical eyes should be so
rich and is so poor. The repulses he receives whet his curiosity and
increase his ardour. Yet Spain is not, in spite of its many tourists, a
country of foreign colonies. To the Englishman this fact brings a
striking novelty, for he may visit Switzerland and Italy and France and
scarcely leave the atmosphere of England, but in Spain he will find no
difficulty in following Bacon’s advice to the traveller in foreign
countries to “sequester himself from the company of his countrymen.”




CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE

NOTE                                                                   v

PREFACE                                                              vii

I. SPANISH CHARACTER--
      i. Some Stray Opinions                                          17
      ii. Vain Generalities                                           25

II. TRAVELLING IN SPAIN                                               47

III. ON THE SPANISH FRONTIER                                          57

IV. ESKUAL-ERRIA--
      i. Basque Country                                               66
      ii. Basque Customs                                              72

V. IN REMOTE NAVARRE                                                  80

VI. SPANISH CITIES                                                    85

VII. IN OLD CASTILLE                                                  92

VIII. THE DESERT AND THE SOWN                                         97

IX. THE COAST OF CATALONIA IN AUTUMN                                 104

X. AN EASTERN VILLAGE                                                108

XI. OFF THE EAST COAST OF SPAIN                                      112

XII. THE JUDGING OF THE WATERS                                       120

XIII. SEVILLE IN WINTER                                              125

XIV. FROM A SEVILLE HOUSETOP                                         129

XV. FEBRUARY IN ANDALUCÍA                                            134

XVI. SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF SPANISH LITERATURE                      142

XVII. THE POEM OF THE CID--
      i. A Primitive Masterpiece                                     153
      ii. Valencia del Cid                                           157

XVIII. A PRISONER OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION--
      i. Novedades                                                   163
      ii. Salamanca University                                       165
      iii. In a Valladolid Dungeon                                   169
      iv. Ex forti dulcedo                                           178

XIX. THE MODERN SPANISH NOVEL--
      i. Revival. Fernán Caballero                                   185
      ii. 1870-1900                                                  191
      iii. In the Twentieth Century                                  201

XX. NOVELS OF GALICIA                                                214

XXI. NOVELS OF THE MOUNTAIN--
      i. “Savour of the Soil”                                        222
      ii. “On the Heights”                                           231

XXII. CASTILIAN PROSE                                                239

XXIII. TOLEDO AND EL GRECO                                           244

INDEX                                                                259




THE MAGIC OF SPAIN




I

SPANISH CHARACTER


I.--STRAY OPINIONS

To collect a mass of isolated and contradictory opinions concerning the
Spanish is a comparatively simple task, although it is difficult or
impossible to derive from them a consistent picture of Spanish
character. To Wellington they are “this extraordinary and perverse
people,” to whom to boast of Spain’s strength was a natural weakness.
“Procrastination and improvidence are their besetting sins,” says
Napier, and of their conduct in the Peninsular War: “Of proverbially
vivid imagination and quick resentments, the Spaniards act individually
rather than nationally, and, during this war, what appeared constancy of
purpose was but a repetition of momentary fury generated like electric
sparks by constant collision with the French.” “The Spaniards are
perfect masters of saying everything and doing nothing.” They have
dignified sentiments and lofty expressions, but taken with their deeds
these are “but a strong wind blowing shrivelled leaves.” “In the
arrangement of warlike affairs difficulties are always overlooked by the
Spaniards, who are carried on from one phantasy to another so swiftly
that the first conception of an enterprise is immediately followed by a
confident anticipation of complete success.” Though they are “hasty in
revenge and feeble in battle,” they are “patient to the last degree in
suffering.” To the peasants he allows “a susceptibility of grand
sentiments.” They “endure calamity, men and women alike, with a singular
and unostentatious courage. But their virtues are passive, their faults
active, and, instigated by a peculiar arrogance, they are perpetually
projecting enterprises which they have not sufficient vigour to
execute.” “To neglect real resources and fasten upon imaginary projects
is peculiarly Spanish.” A French writer of the same period, General
Marbot, contents himself with observing that the Spanish “ont beaucoup
conservé du caractère des Arabes et sont fatalistes; aussi
répétaient-ils sans cesse ‘Lo que ha de ser no puede faltar,’” but adds
that “ils ont un mérite immense, c’est que, bien que battus, ils ne se
découragent jamais.” Turning to earlier centuries we find that in Livy
and Strabo the Spaniards are obstinate, unsociable, silent, dressed in
black, despisers of death, very sober. In the centuries of Spain’s
greatness the comments naturally thicken, although they are often not
easily reconcilable. To an Italian, Paolo Cortese, at the beginning of
the sixteenth century the Spanish are, in a shower of epithets,
“ambitious, good-natured, curious, greedy, contentious, tenacious,
magnificent, suspicious, sly.” Another Italian, Paolo Tiepolo, later
draws a distinction[1] between those who have travelled and those who
have not left Spain, those former being “per la maggior parte avvisati,
diligenti, tolleranti.” In Pepys we read of the “ceremoniousness of the
Spaniards,” and that “the Spaniards are the best disciplined foot in the
world; will refuse no extraordinary service if commanded, but scorn to
be paid for it as in other countries,” and of “the plain habit of the
Spaniards, how the King and Lords themselves wear but a cloak of
Colchester bayze, and the ladies mantles in cold weather of white
flannell.” To a learned Spaniard, Masdeu, they are, to quote but a few
of his judgments, “lively, swift in conception, slow and thoughtful in
coming to a resolution, active and effectual in carrying it into
execution. They are the stoutest defenders of religion, and masters in
asceticism.” “Their disinterestedness and honesty in commerce is known
to all. They are frugal at table, especially averse from any excess in
drinking. In conversation they are serious and taciturn, not giving to
biting speech, courteous, affable, and pleasant; they hate flattery, but
they respect others and look to be respected themselves. They speak with
majesty, but without affectation. They are generous, serviceable,
kindly, and have a pleasure in conferring benefits, and they exalt
things foreign more than their own. They have envy, pride, and a love of
glory, but with noble, redeeming qualities. In their attire they are
neat and moderate; when they go abroad they are dressed well and
smartly, but with a befitting gravity.” “They spend with magnificence
and extravagance.” A French traveller, Mme. d’Aulnoy,[2] in the
seventeenth century, says of the Spanish that “Nature has been kinder to
them than they are to themselves; they are born with more wit than
others; they have a great quickness of mind join’d with great solidity;
they speak and deliver their words with ease; they have a great memory;
their style is neat and concise, and they are quick of apprehension; it
is easie to teach them whatever they have a mind to; they are perfect
masters in Politicks, and when there is a necessity for it they are
temperate and laborious.”... “They are patient to excess, obstinate,
idle, singular philosophers; and, as to the rest, men of honour, keeping
their words tho’ it cost them their lives.” She considers their greatest
defect to be a “passion for revenge,” and speaks of “their fantastick
grandeur.” A short account by an Englishman in 1701, has little good to
say of the Spanish, except that they “have an incomparable Zeal to plant
the Catholick Religion.” He notes their sluggishness, their immorality,
and it is, moreover, impossible to distinguish a Spanish Cavalier from a
Cobler, while most of their houses are “of earth and like Mole-hills,
but one storey high.” They have an “esprit orgueilleux,” and treat
strangers “de turc à maure,” says a Frenchman of the same period,[3] so
that the Englishman may have had some slight, some _turc à maure_
experience in Spain. Another Englishman,[4] half a century later, writes
that the Spanish are “generous, liberal, magnificent, and charitable;
religious without dispute, but devout to the greatest excess of
superstition.”... “If they have any predominant fault it is perhaps
that of being rather too high-minded; hence they have entertained, at
different times, the most extravagant conceits.”... “Their cloaths are
usually of a very dark colour, and their cloaks almost black. This shows
the natural gravity of the people.”... “There are no soldiers in the
whole world braver than the Spanish.” Reclus, in his estimate of the
Spanish, has boldly allowed the contrasts and contradictions of Spanish
character to stand side by side. They are “apathetic in daily life, but
of a quick resolution, persistent courage and unwearying tenacity. They
are vain, but if any one has a right to be so, they have. In spite of
their pride they are simple and pleasant in their manners. They esteem
themselves highly, but they are equally ready to recognize the merit of
others. They are very swift and keen to lay a finger on the weak side or
the vices of other people, but never bemean themselves by despising
them. They have a great store of seriousness, a rare firmness of
character. They are contented with their lot and are fatalists. A
mixture of superstition and ignorance, common-sense, and subtle irony;
they are at times ferocious, though naturally of a magnanimous
generosity, fond of revenge, yet forgetting injuries, fond of equality,
yet guilty of oppression.” The verdicts of modern Spanish thinkers have
been mostly pessimistic.[5] Spaniards in the twentieth century have been
busily occupied with analytical introspection, the result of their
national misfortunes and injured pride. They prefer to speak atrociously
of themselves than that foreigners should speak of them only moderately
well. Señor Mallada holds[6] his countrymen to be “idle, unpractical
dreamers.” In Spain, says Ángel Ganivet,[7] “there are many who have no
will, _hay muchos enfermos de la voluntad_”--there is a lack of
concentration, that is of persistent concentration, and a lack of
proportion, of the power to consider more than one idea, more than one
aspect of a question. So _Azorín_ complains that “there is plenty of
insight and rapid vision, but no co-ordination of ideas or steady
fulfilment or will.”[8] In a book by Ricardo León[9] we read that the
Spanish are hostile to their rulers, whoever they may be, and of the
evils of _el Caciquismo_. But the author sees little hope of change in a
country where men live between two extremes, “two fires, two
fanaticisms,” either reactionaries or demagogues; where the currents of
activity and passion are unregulated, where thought is either stagnant
or enmeshed in a gossamer woof of subtle distinctions, and the golden
mean of common-sense is not attained. The inhabitants of Alcalá are
“strong, hard, brave, and stubborn, rigorous in their virtues and their
vices, violent in their loves and hates, tenacious alike of good and of
evil.” To counterbalance their clear intelligence, greatheartedness,
quick imagination and eloquence they have serious defects, “and
especially a certain unrestfulness of spirit, a nervous irritability
which prevents them from living in peace or comfort with themselves or
with others, a true Spanish failing, peculiarly attached both of old and
at the present day to that harsh, turbulent, strongly original character
of the race which has never allowed us rest, but kept us perpetually at
strife, taking umbrage at our very shadows.”... “While there were
infidels to fight, strongholds to defend, vows to fulfil, or even when
there were civil wars and vigorous smuggling and bands of brigands,”
there was scope for the virtues and vices of a people “born and bred
for action and passionate deeds,” “fashioned in battle”; but “on the
advent of the moderate customs of modern times” they find themselves
“out of their natural atmosphere, idle, poor, disconcerted, cramped.”
And this is the tragedy of Spain to-day--a great-hearted people in the
toils of civilization. In Pérez Galdós’ “El Caballero Encantado,” the
spirit of Spain thus addresses one of her sons: “The capital defect of
the Spaniards of your time is that you live exclusively the life of
words, and the language is so beautiful that the delight in the sweet
sound of it woos you to sleep. You speak too much; you lavish without
stint a wealth of phrases to conceal the poverty of your actions.”[10]
In an earlier book[11] Señor León deplores the fashion prevailing in
Spain “to depreciate all that is Spanish, and to bestow great praise on
all that is foreign. A wave of moral cowardice and utilitarian baseness
is passing over Spain.” But Spanish character is not permanently
weakened nor shorn of its dignity and independence, the eclipse is but
temporary and, indeed, partial, not affecting the humbler classes. The
spirit of Spain will revive, as in “El Caballero Encantado,” when it is
being carried from the death-bed to the grave,[12] and may be aptly
likened, as by Don Rafael Altamira, to the waters of the Guadiana which,
after flowing for a space underground, return once more to the surface.


II.--VAIN GENERALITIES.

“And indeed,” wrote Pepys, “we do all naturally love the Spanish and
hate the French,” and if, since his day, we have learned to love the
French, the character of the Spanish has not ceased to attract and
interest Englishmen. Yet any attempt to generalize concerning Spanish
character would seem a vain and foolish task, since Spain is the country
of Europe which has most stringently preserved its local differences of
race and language, and it is still true, as in Ford’s time, that “the
rude agricultural Gallician, the industrious manufacturing artisan of
Barcelona, the gay and voluptuous Andalucian, the sly vindictive
Valencian are as essentially different from each other as so many
distinct characters at the same masquerade,” and the Basque[13] and
_andaluz_, for instance, are as far apart as Frenchman and Spaniard. It
is possible to take the various ingredients, Castilian pride,[14]
Catalan thrift,[15] Andalusian imagination, Gallegan dullness,[16] the
grimness of Navarre, the stubbornness of Aragon,[17] Valencian or
Murcian cunning, and, tying them into a convenient bundle, to speak of
the Spanish as proud, thrifty, etc., or, in a more pessimistic key, as
haughty, avaricious, untruthful, stolid, cruel, obstinate, malicious.
But, though such a judgment is notoriously false, a few qualities may
perhaps be attributed to the whole of Spain as in some measure common to
her various peoples. Foremost among these qualities are independence and
personal dignity. The Spaniards are a nation of individualists, each a
law unto himself, and they are thus as a nation frequently misunderstood
and their pride has not suffered them to correct errors concerning them,
while at the same time it would perhaps be difficult to find in any
other nation so great a number of individuals whom one may admire and
respect. The dramatist Don Jacinto Benavente has said[18] that in Spain
“each of us would like to be the only great man in a nation of fools,
the only honest man in a tribe of knaves,” and speaks of “our unbridled
individualism.” No one is a more thorough individualist than Don Pío
Baroja, and the principal character of his novel, _César ó Nada_,
declares that the Spanish, “as individualists require, more than a
democratic, federal organization, an iron military discipline.”
“Democracy, Republicanism, Socialism have in reality little root in our
country.... Moreover we admit no superiorities and do not willingly
accept king or president, priest or prophet.” It is this refractoriness
which has made the Spanish so hard a people to govern, and wrought
permanent mischief to their prosperity as a nation. They would seem to
have still to learn the true dignity of loyalty and service. Every
Spaniard, of however humble a position, considers that he is well
qualified to criticize the measures of his rulers, and still more the
fancied measures that he chooses to attribute to them. Thus in a
Republic every citizen would believe himself to be capable of conducting
the affairs of the nation better than the President, as Sancho was
convinced that he could govern his island as well or better than any;
nevertheless Spaniards are inclined to acquiesce in a firm unquestioned
authority with a kind of heroical submission, accepting its decisions as
they accept the inevitable decrees of fate, and for this reason an
old-established system of government, such as the Monarchy, is
infinitely the best suited to the Spanish temperament. No doubt they
would prefer to have no system of government, if that were possible,
being restive and tumultuous under restraint. On one occasion a Spanish
_chauffeur_ while driving his mistress considered that he had been
insulted by a passer in the street and, leaving mistress and motor,
proceeded to punish the offender till the police interfered.[19] And if
the Spanish find it difficult to work harmoniously under the orders of
others, it is no easier for them to maintain a joint authority; they can
never co-operate for long, their political parties and commercial unions
rapidly fall asunder like the seeds of a pomegranate. Similarly one may
see at a glance of any Spanish crowd that it is not a fused mass but a
collection of units remaining aloof and separate; if the individual
gains, the State suffers, and Spanish politics sometimes have an air of
cramping angularities and crude ambitions. But this individualism and
independence has its nobler and more pleasant side, for even in extreme
poverty and distress, dignity and an accompanying courtesy, honesty, and
sobriety,[20] rarely desert the Spaniard. Each is king in his own
house, be it miserable attic or merely the space of sun that his shadow
covers; _mientras en mi casa me estoy rey me soy_. The following
dialogue bears intrinsic evidence of its nationality, it could not
belong to any country but Spain: “Is your worship a thief?”--“Yes, to
serve God and all good people.”[21] Thus personal dignity and individual
pride may be said to be the dominant notes of Spain. So the beggars in
the street address one another as Sir, _señor_, lord, and if you cannot
give them an alms for the good of your soul you must at least give
excuses--_perdone Vd. por Dios_. While we admire this independence we
cannot help seeing that it is a false dignity, which prefers to starve,
like one of the characters in Pérez Galdós’ _Fortunata y Jacinta_,
because “_mi dinidá y sinificancia no me permiten_--my dignity and
importance do not allow me,” to accept employment. The fair outward show
given to garret poverty is pathetic, but it is liable to deceive and to
create distrust. Mme. d’Aulnoy remarked that the Spanish “bear up under
this Indigency with such an air of gravity as would cheat one.”

In _Love’s Labour’s Lost_ Don Adriano de Armado says to Moth that he is
“ill at reckoning; it fitteth the spirit of a tapster,” but to Moth’s
observation, “You are a gentleman and a gamester, Sir,” he answers
well-pleased, “I confess both; they are both the varnish of a complete
man” (_todo un hombre_). The Spanish have ever shown themselves to be
ill at reckoning, they are careless of details and have indeed an
Oriental incuriousness of facts and figures; in no country is it more
difficult to obtain accurate returns or consecutive statistics. Against
all drudgery the Spanish temperament rebels[22]; they act by impulse, in
disconnected moments without persistency; their concentration is of
instants,[23] without consequence; and it has been observed that “Spain
has developed her life and art by means of spiritual convulsions.” What
is said in one of Pérez Galdós’ novels[24] of Narváez might with truth
be applied to many Spaniards: “He has a great heart and a great
intelligence, but they manifest themselves only by fits and starts, by
impulses, _por arranques_.” There is plenty of intelligence among
Spaniards but little continuity of judgment; no perseverance. They are
enthusiastic for a project and, their thoughts outrunning action, they
see the matter begun, in progress, finished, so that their very keenness
prevents accomplishment, and finally nothing is done. Don Quixote, we
remember, thought little of the winning of a kingdom and cutting off a
giant’s head: “all that I consider already done, _que todo esto doy ya
for hecho._” Or sometimes their intelligence mars their labour and, not
content with doing a simple thing simply, they spoil it by being a
little too clever, or decide a matter too readily by a swift judgment
that may happen to be false. The Spanish are a people of immense and
abiding energy,[25] but their energy is often dormant or misdirected.
Two Spaniards in the twentieth century have been seen to converse with
so fierce an intensity that it seemed over and over again in the course
of a protracted and loud discussion that they must come from words to
blows; and the matter in dispute, conducted with a heat that would have
exhausted less energetic natures, was whether it was right or wrong to
expel the Moriscos from Spain at the beginning of the seventeenth
century. Yet it is not certain that the Spanish can be called
unpractical; they are often idle, indifferent, aloof from the events of
daily life, but when a matter truly interests them, they would seem to
be sufficiently shrewd and practical. King James I. of Aragon aimed an
accusation at the Castilians which has often been applied to all
Spaniards: “You do nothing without extravagance.[26]” But a fundamental
ingredient of Spanish character is realism and clear vision; it is
their birthright of transparent subtle air and unclouded skies. They are
keen to detect all falseness and hypocrisy, and display a shrewd insight
into character; but their study has been ever of persons rather than of
books and things,[27] so that they may act extravagantly themselves even
while they are the first to see another’s extravagance, keenly
practical, it may be said, in the affairs of others, strangely abstract
and improvident in their own. Their realism, if it drives them by
reaction into a barren love of words and visions of impossible ideals,
expresses itself in a directness which is very characteristic of all
classes of Spaniards, in the pregnant brevity of countless proverbs, in
concentrated intensity at a given moment, in humour and satire and a
strong love of ridicule. Their proverbs show a thriftiness and practical
good sense very different from the prudence that enriches, but equally
far removed from the romantic view of Spaniards sometimes held by
foreigners. In noble lines Calderón has said of life that it is “a
shadow, a fantasy, and the greatest good is of small worth, since all
life is a dream and dreams themselves a dream”:--

    ¿qué es la vida? Un frenesí.
    ¿qué es la vida? Una ilusión,
    una sombra, una ficción,
    y el mayor bien es pequeño,
    que toda la vida es sueño
    y los sueños sueño son;

but we may doubt whether the following lines of Lope de Vega are not as
truly Spanish in spirit:--

    Nada me parece bien,
    Todos me son importunos.--
    ¿Teneis dineros?--Ningunos.--
    Pues procurad que os los den.

“I see no good in anything; all men weary me.--Have you
money?--None--Then see that you get some given you.”[28] An almost harsh
flavour of originality is found in Spanish humour, a sly and malicious
irony, a biting wit, full of gaiety and good-humour, but of great force
and directness. Their courtesy is proverbial, and it is not simply a
superficial politeness, brittle as glass, but goes to the very core of
the man. A knowledge of Spain would seem to show that the mere forms of
politeness have no little effect in maintaining the dignity of a nation.
The Spaniard, writing from his own house, speaks of it as _esta su
casa_, this your house, and to a tradesman he will sign himself, “Your
sure servant, who kisses your hands” (S.S.S., Q.B.S.M. which is shorter
than the corresponding English, “Yours faithfully”); mere forms, it will
be said, but forms that show the spirit and betray the lordly and
generous magnificence of the men who once ruled the world, and of whom
Bacon wrote: “I have marvelled sometimes at Spain, how they clasp and
contain so large dominions with so few natural Spaniards.” As a kind of
magnificent disregard of human life has earned for Spaniards the charge
of cruelty, so their attitude towards time has led many to look upon
them as lazy and utterly unbusinesslike.[29] “The Spartans and Spaniards
have been noted to be of small dispatch,” says Bacon, and this
procrastination and delay was as prominent in the spacious times of
Spain’s greatness as at the present day. We need but think of the
endless trailing procedure of Inquisition trials, or of books waiting on
the frontier for inspection with a man hired to dust them once a month.
In ordinary life it is due perhaps rather to indifference and disdain
than to an innate sluggishness; in official transactions formalism, and
the inability to co-operate with others often bring matters to an
intricate pass of papers, from which there is no issue but by a patient
and slow unravelling. Even to-day a rigid centralization carries the
pettiest affair to Madrid for settlement, and lays upon the Prime
Minister a crushing load of work. Etiquette is carried to excess, and
there are in Spain many “formal natures,” men who would perish upon a
ceremony rather than come to a quick and common-sense conclusion. But
the true defect of Spanish politics is that they have a tendency to
become abstract, with many excellent formulas and catchwords, but
divorced from reality, a kind of up-to-date scholasticism. Sometimes
they appear to be a game of dialectics, carried on by a few skilful
players, sometimes a “rushing splendour of rhetoric,” carrying away
many. Spaniards are fond of what Butler calls “that idle and not very
innocent employment of forming imaginary models of the world and schemes
of governing it.” Spanish politicians, says Señor Pérez Galdós, “live in
a world of rituals and formulas, recipes and expedients. The language
has filled with aphorisms and mottos and emblems. Ideas become
stereotyped, and contemplated actions go seeking to embody themselves in
words and cannot make their choice of them.”[30] It would seem indeed
that reality has shown itself so angular and hard-featured to the
Spanish that they gladly make efforts to escape from it. While no nation
shows so great a courage, endurance and patient endeavour in misfortune
and defeat, they are not equally successful in success, they are often
spoilt by prosperity and become weak, dissolute and frivolous; they must
have something to fight, and fall when they no longer press against
opposition. This may account for the fact that the poorer classes are
still, as in Ford’s time, “by no means the worst portion of the
population.” The peasants are courteous, intelligent, patient, energetic
and persevering: their praises have been sung by many writers.[31] But a
pathetic fatalism and apathy prevail, and a great bitterness against
those in authority. _Pobreza nunca alza cabeza_, poverty never raises
its head, they say, _la cárcel y la cuaresma para los pobres es hecha_,
prison and Lent are for the poor; they look for no bettering of their
lot, but for _pan y paciencia y muerte con penitencia_--bread and
patience and death with repentance. But it must be said that the fault
is not only of those “on top,” but of those also who, brooking no
superiorities of any kind,[32] thus reduce differences between man and
man to the brutal divisions of wealth and poverty and make life a race
for riches. It remains true, however, that the peasants of Spain are
ground down by taxes,[33] and work incessantly only to hover on the
fringes of starvation; _todo sea por Dios_, they say, and content
themselves with the observation that honesty and riches do not fit into
one sack--_honra y provecho no caben en un saco_. There is a certain
elemental hardness in the Spanish which helps them to support hardships
stoically and, indeed, to be scornful of modern comforts and luxury.
Their indifference towards disquiet and discomfort and noisy uproar[34]
often dismays the foreigner, but it is not that they are inconsiderate
of the feelings of others, they have a deep sensitiveness and
refinement, but they have not been enervated and rendered over-sensitive
by a luxurious civilization. Their climate, with its harsh extremes of
cold and heat,[35] produces a people like that of León’s _Alcalá de los
Zegríes_, “rigorous in their virtues and their vices, violent in their
loves and hates.” They go easily to extremes; Spanish intellects are apt
to be either totally undeveloped, or else over-subtle in nice
distinctions, and action in the same way, when it comes, comes with
violence and excess, like the rivers of Spain which, parched all summer,
pour down after rain in rushing torrents. The charges of cruelty and
fanaticism, the bull-fight and the _auto-de-fé_, have fixed themselves
upon the Spanish. They are by nature inflexible and uncompromising, and
like to carry out their principles without looking to the many delicate
shades of grey between white and black. But they are not by nature
cruel; they support bodily sufferings with courage and inflict them upon
others as the lesser of two evils, burning the heretics to prevent the
spread of their heresy; and indeed to men convinced that these
“pertinacious schismaticks” were to burn for ever and ever in another
place, a touch of fire in this life could hardly seem an excessive
punishment.[36] Cruelty to animals on the roads of Spain is extremely
rare, and at the bull-fights[37] it is only fair to observe that, while
the foreigner’s attention is directed to the sufferings of the horses,
the whole mind of the Spaniard is bent on intricacies of the conflict
between man and bull, and nice passes which escape the foreigner.[38]
The _autos-de-fé_ and the Inquisition have cast over Spain a reputation
for fanaticism and obscurantist bigotry. But the Spanish, while eager
supporters of their faith, are too independent to bow down for long to a
Clerical predominance; they cannot be called a priest-ridden nation.[39]
_Ni buen fraile por amigo, ni malo por enemigo_, says one of their
proverbs--make no friend of a good monk, nor enemy of a bad; and again,
_Haz lo que dice el fraile no lo que hace_--follow the monk’s precept,
not his example. They believe uncompromisingly in the Roman Catholic
religion, but have a ready eye for the faults of its ministers; they
love and reverence the Church as a refuge from reality, but continue to
be realists in their mysticism. The Church in Spain has done noble work,
but it has been a retreat more than a morality, encouraging hollow shows
rather than love of truth,[40] patience and submission rather than
enterprise and a persistent search for remedies. The anti-Clericals
complain that the influence of the priest in the family is excessive,
but when the women are kept in a semi-Oriental seclusion, while the men
chatter together in street and casino and café, as still happens in many
parts of Spain,[41] it is but natural for the women to turn from the
discomfort and isolation of their homes to the magnificent ceremonies of
the Church.[42] The Spaniards are naturally inclined to generosity and a
love of magnificence, but, their poverty preventing, this too often
degenerates to shams and hollowness. To poverty and the proud
concealment of poverty, much of the feeling of suspicion which prevails
in Spain may be attributed. A large number of Spaniards may be said to
be well-to-do in the street, poverty-stricken in the home. The family
in Pereda’s _Bocetos al temple_ which chooses without a moment’s
hesitation to live on potatoes in order to be able to dress luxuriously,
is no solitary instance, and in Madrid many live in bare rooms who drive
abroad in carriages. The Spanish are more careful of outward show than
any other nation. The universal neatness and soldierly smartness of
their dress must excite admiration. But watch a poor man fold and refold
the brilliantly lined outer edge of his _capa_ that the more worn
portions of the velvet may not appear--the _capa_ which may itself cover
a multitude of sins (_la capa todo lo tapa_) that recalls the passage in
Shakespeare:--

     “_Armado_: The naked truth of it is I have no shirt. I go woolward
     for penance.

     _Boyet_: True, and it was enjoined him in Rome for want of linen.”

Or follow a smart officer through the streets to his house. The position
and entrance of the house will not prepare you for its decreasing
splendour as you climb stair after stair to the bare rooms where he
lives. There is much that is _postizo_, false and artificial, in the
exterior view, as Spaniards will themselves bitterly confess.
Appearances must be maintained. So Bacon says that “It hath been an
opinion that the Frenchmen are wiser than they seem and the Spaniards
seem wiser than they are,” and many of their houses are built not to
live in but to look on. Hence, partly, a disquieting element of
mistrust, of “suspicions that ever fly by twilight” foreign to the
frank and open nature of true Spaniards. “Of every Spanish undertaking,”
writes Señor Benavente in 1909, “it may be said as of the famous
_Cortes_ that it is ‘dishonoured while yet unborn.’ The result is that
he who is jealous of his good name shuns contact with all business
affairs like pitch, and the affairs fall into the hands of men who are
untroubled by scruples.... All these suspicions and distrusts are a sign
rather of our poverty than of our morality. There is so great a scarcity
of money that it becomes unintelligible that any one who has the
handling of it should fail to keep a part for himself.... We are,
moreover, so firmly attached to old-fashioned ideas of
nobility--_rancias hidalguías_--that, in spite of our pressing need of
money, we still consider its acquisition contemptible; so we prefer to
seek it by subterranean channels as if it were a crime to seek it in the
light of day.”

Suspicion of new things has ever been at once the strength and the
weakness of Spain.[43] In the nineteenth century this suspicion
expressed itself in patriotism carried to its extreme logical
conclusion. Were Napoleon’s reforms of a nature to benefit Spain in an
inestimable degree? To the Spaniard they were the tyrannical and
insidious measures of a usurper. Was his brother Joseph intelligent,
well-intentioned, conciliatory? To the Spaniard he was ever the
squint-eyed drinker, _Pepe Botellas_, and it was idle to insist that he
did not squint, and did not drink. Was King Amadeo an enlightened,
courageous, and self-effacing ruler? To the Spaniard he was an intruder,
to be treated with neglect, insolence or disdain. This distrust may have
been foolish and harmful to the interests of Spain, but it was in many
respects noble and admirable. To-day, however, we have rather the
reverse side of the picture, a pessimism about all things Spanish, and a
foolish tendency to imitate things foreign. Beneath his outer _capa_ of
haughty pride the Spaniard is keenly aware of his limitations; he has no
confidence in his own actions or in his country, or, rather, his
confidence is merely momentary and is never sustained. It is, no doubt,
a sign not of progress but degeneracy to exchange the Spanish _capa_,
peculiarly suited to a climate of hot sun and cold air, for English
overcoats or the becoming mantilla for the newest fashion in Parisian
hats. It is not necessarily a sign of progress to exchange old-fashioned
Spanish piety for the latest shades of scepticism, or to leave the
simple life of an _hidalgo_ in the provinces for the idler, dissipated
life in the only capital and court. The desire to be very modern is at
present a good thing in Spain, yet it need not consist in casting aside
old traditions and diffidently rejecting Spanish customs that are
excellent. This exalting of foreign customs and depreciation of their
own which has been frequently observed of Spaniards, is due rather to
an inverted pride than to humility; at the beginning of the nineteenth
century it was considered a mark of culture in Spain to despise things
Spanish and to worship things French, but all the time the Spanish
believe at heart in themselves,[44] they praise foreign countries with
their lips, but continue to place Spain first, and if they imitate, they
cast a peculiarly Iberian flavour over their imitations. The late Bishop
Creighton, looking at Spain historically, remarked that it “leaves the
curious impression of a country which never did anything original--now
the Moors, now France, now Italy, have influenced it.” If this is so,
certainly the Moors, and France, and Italy have wrought some of their
most original works in Spain; and it can hardly be said that the great
Spanish discoverers and conquerors, painters, philosophers, and poets of
the fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth centuries were not original,
whether they were influenced by Moors, Frenchmen, or Italians.[45] But,
indeed, the Spaniard more readily repels than assimilates, it is his
virtue and his defect; he remains isolated and alone, difficult to
convince, impossible to govern. New political and social theories from
France are spread in Spain, but they there serve progress less than
disquiet and the rancour of those who have not towards those who have.
The reforms needed by Spain will not be furthered by riots and disorder,
and the demagogues who encourage them are perhaps less patriotic than
they profess to be. For Spain needs peace, long periods of tranquillity
in which to develop her resources and to learn the more difficult task
of maintaining in prosperity that strength and independent nobility of
character which have shone out so clearly in misfortune. The conclusion
then, if so desultory a study warrants a conclusion, is that the Spanish
are a fundamentally noble, courteous, and independent people, energetic
and brave, with a natural tendency to grandeur and generosity, whom
poverty often leads to hollow display and the consequent suspicion and
distrust. They will be at immense pains to “bear up under their
indigency,” but have a greater consideration for the semblance than for
the reality and substance of well-being, for artificial show, supported
by infinite care and ingenuity, than for a more solid prosperity, based
on serious effort. Their realism, throwing into relief the apparent
pettiness of daily life, causes them to dream dreams and weave fragile
abstract palaces of fair-sounding phrases; they have not that useful
quality of accuracy, an understanding of the value and importance of
details and gradual effort, of pennies and minutes: they will smite a
stone in twain at a great blow, but the idea that it might be pierced by
drops of water _saepe cadendo_ is foreign to them, and often they aim
at a million and miss a unit. They are a nation of strongly original
characters, acting on impulses and intermittently, and thinking in
extremes; often failing in the face of prosperity, but proud, resolute,
and patient in misfortune; often magnificently imprudent, but never
despicable, except to those whose worship is of riches and success; an
admirable but discomfortable people, not adapting itself readily to
modern conditions, but ever to be reckoned with as an energetic, vital
force, not bowing permanently before defeat.




II

TRAVELLING IN SPAIN


It was, of course, Samuel Johnson who said, “There is a good deal of
Spain that has not been perambulated,” and the remark still holds good
for those who, like Don Quixote, wish to “go seeking adventures.” The
brigand stories, “got up,” as Ford would say, “for the home market,” are
now slightly exploded, and few travellers expect to find at every turn--

    “Cent coupe-jarrets à faces renégates
     Coiffés de montéras et chaussés d’alpargates.”

Yet even to-day few foreigners realize that they may cross and recross
the Peninsula from north to south and from east to west in perfect
security. They will meet with no cloak-and-sword episodes; their
adventures must be of another order. It is true that the Spaniard can
use his knife, but the knife comes into play in quarrels of cards and
love and jealousy, in which the passing traveller can have no part.
Those, however, who measure culture by comfort, and wish to journey as
consistent first-class passengers through life, should certainly narrow
their Spanish travels to the round of a few cities--

    “Erret et extremos scrutetur alter Iberos,”

and, however rapid and conventional, a journey that includes the
Alhambra, the Mosque of Córdoba, the Cathedrals of Seville, Toledo, and
Burgos,[46] and the picture-galleries of Seville and Madrid, can
scarcely be said to have been in vain. But to know Spain and the
Spaniards it is necessary to go further afield, to the small towns and
villages of Andalucía and Castille, for here, rather than in the larger
towns, is to be found the true spirit of the race. Some five thousand
villages are still to be reached only by bridle-paths, and in these
there has been little change since Cervantes went his rounds collecting
taxes; so that for those who care to leave the beaten track there still
remain many unexplored districts, and much first-hand knowledge to glean
of the country and its inhabitants. To many, no doubt, Spain is the
country of dance and song and sun-burnt mirth, of the flutter of fans
and the flash of dark eyes; the country of the bull-fight and the white
mantilla and carnations in the hair; of Roman ruins and Moorish palaces
set in groves of myrtle and orange; of--

    “Cloaked shapes, the twanging of guitars,
     A rush of feet and rapiers clashing,
     Then silence deep with breathless stars,
     And overhead a white hand flashing.”

and if any shadows fall across the picture they are those of the
brigand and the priest-inquisitor. Then comes the inevitable reaction.
Those who visit Spain find that it is for them indeed _un pays de
l’imprévu_. The former image in their mind soon perishes, and they cry
out upon this “ciel insalubre,” this--

                            “pays endiablé;
    Nous y mangions, au lieu de farine de blé,
    Des rats et des souris et pour toutes ribotes
    Nous avons dévoré beaucoup de vieilles bottes.”

But, to judge from many books published about Spain, most European
countries would seem to have entered into a league to look upon the
Peninsula solely as a land of a poetical unreality, its inhabitants
divided into inquisitors, monks, brigands, and conspirators, lending--

          “the colour of romance
    To every trivial circumstance.”

A well-balanced and accurate account of the country is singularly rare.
It is true that in some respects Spain has changed little since the
sixteenth century, but, on the other hand, during the twentieth century,
while she has been making laborious progress, foreign ideas of Spain
have remained stationary, with the prejudices and fixed opinions of
fifty years ago. No error or exaggeration concerning Spain is too
ridiculous to be affirmed and readily believed, and those who take no
thought to study the Peninsula in quiet days save as a land of vague
romance, when trouble occurs are officious with wise criticisms and
stern common-sense, based on ignorance. Quite recently the hysterical
visions of prisoners tortured in Spanish dungeons, and of priestly
cruelty and greed, might persuade one that Mr. Kipling’s “Little Foxes”
was written not before, but after, the events of 1909 in Spain. One
forgets that it is of Ethiopia, not Spain, that Mr. Lethabie Groombride,
M.P., exclaims, “What callous oppression! The dark places of the earth
are full of cruelty!” Like the natives of Ethiopia, the courteous
Spaniards are “much pleased at your condescensions;” but they too have a
sense of humour, and note with amusement the ignorance of nations which
declare that Spain’s chief need is more education and culture.

For the traveller who wishes to explore the remote parts of Spain, and
to escape from Spanish trains, the simplest method is to proceed on
horseback. Walking and bicycling and motoring are possible in the North,
and especially in the Basque Provinces, where the inns are good and the
roads excellent. But in most parts of Spain they are practically
impossible; the roads are too stony or too dusty even for walking, and,
moreover, in fifty kilometres you may find hardly one inn. There remains
the _diligencia_--_coche_, _tartana_, _diabla_, call it what you
will--but a single experience of it will probably be sufficient. It
rolls and lurches heavily to the loud, continuous shouting of the driver
to his horses: _Caballo-allo-allo-allo_, _Mula-ula-ula-ula_. The
traveller, if he has the misfortune to be in the interior, is beaten
against the wooden sides, the windows rattle, the bells jingle, the
vehicle sways slowly on its way, groaning and complaining of the
breadth, as well as the length, of the road[47]--_nosotros tambien
llegaremos, si Dios quiere_, as a driver said when passed by more rapid
travellers, “if it is the will of Heaven.” Occasionally at a country
railway station may be seen a boy who is a pillar of dust or mud. He is
the _zagal_ of the _diligencia_, who runs by its side through dirt and
mire, urging on the horses, or stands to rest on the step at the back.
Sometimes the _diligencia_ descends into river-beds, usually dry; and
after much rain it is apt to stay there, and darkness falls and the
frogs croak mockingly, while more mules are fetched to help in the work
of extrication. Often it proceeds by night, throwing strange, fantastic
shadows in the narrow streets of sleeping villages. The driver must
undergo not only extremes of heat and cold, but is often in danger of
snowdrifts and swollen torrents and rocks from the hill-sides. A
Navarrese innkeeper, an old soldier of Santa Cruz, introduced a driver
of a _diligencia_ as “the bravest man of my acquaintance.” Spanish
travellers accept all these discomforts with a marvellous, fatalistic
resignation and equanimity; but even a pedestrian will go further and
fare better in an afternoon than a traveller in _diligencia_ during a
whole day. Still, as a unique experience, a _diligencia_ drive must be
undertaken; and the driver is good company, sparing time from the loud
praise and blame meted out to his mules to bestow pithy comments on the
living and the dead--

    “The crosses in the mountain pass,
     Mules gay with tassels, the loud din
     Of muleteers, the tethered ass
     That crops the dusty wayside grass,
     And cavaliers with spurs of brass
     Alighting at the inn.”

The inns, _mesones_, _ventorrillos_, _ventas_, _posadas_, _paradores_,
are still much the same as in the times of Cervantes, moderately clean,
immoderately uncomfortable, bare alike of furniture and food.[48] Still
to your first inquiry the answer is, “_Hay de todo_, we have
everything,” still to your further inquiry the abstract _todo_ shrinks
to _nada_. But for an understanding of the Spanish people, nothing is
more interesting and one may add, more pleasant than to listen to their
talk as they sit round some great inn fire of crackling scented twigs
burning on the stone floor of the court and kitchen. The discomfort and
hardships of travel in remote parts of Spain are repaid in flowing
measure. Here a solitary peasant is seen ploughing land so precipitous
and steep that the stones rattle down as he advances; there the mules
stand hour by hour at the plough while the peasants--in this case
servants on some great estate--play cards, the large earthenware
_botijos_ of water standing ready to their hand; or a group of workers
in the fields stand shivering in early morning round a great common
_puchero_, dipping their spoons in turn, and in turn raising the _bota_
high above their heads to drink; or one has a glimpse of some peasant’s
dress[49] of brilliant colouring, of some ancient vanishing costume of
leather or velvet, silk embroidery or silver buttons--at every turn some
quaint custom, some curious picturesque scene and colour appears, and
the talk of the peasants is a delight. The two most successful English
travellers in Spain were beyond doubt, Ford and Borrow. They won the
respect of all classes of Spaniards, and saw practically the whole of
Spanish life three-quarters of a century ago. Borrow describes himself
on one occasion as “dressed in the fashion of the peasants of the
neighbourhood of Segovia in Old Castile, namely, I had on my head a
species of leather helmet or _montera_, with a jacket and trousers of
the same material.” And Ford says: “In all out-of-the-way districts the
traveller may adopt the national costume of the road, to wit, the
peaked hat (_sombrero gacho_), the jacket of fur (_zamarra_).” But
without the peaked hat, now almost extinct, or Borrow’s leathern helmet,
a few changes of dress and especially what Ford calls “a graceful and
sleeveless Castilian _manta_” or rather _capa_, excellently suited to
the climate, will bring many advantages. For to the ordinary traveller,
with red book and camera, the Spaniard will hardly disclose his true
nature, and remains an impenetrable mystery; not that the foreigner
often realizes the existence of the unsolved riddle, the Spaniard
presenting a sufficient number of striking aspects to make a swift
superficial impression. The best guides to Spain are still Ford’s
“Gatherings,” and a thorough acquaintance with “Don Quixote,” a fluent
knowledge of Spanish, and, lastly, the advice of Spaniards, since as
Sancho sagely observed, “más sabe el necio en su casa que el cuerdo en
casa ajena.” The traveller in Spain may in the heat of summer listen to
the silver plashing of fountains in marble _patios_, and feel the
coolness of snowy Sierras; he may in early morning gather frozen oranges
to be eaten later beneath a burning sun; but it is this sun which with
the cold winds tends to limit his wanderings to a brief period of spring
or autumn. Martial indeed says--

    “Aestus serenos aureo franges Tago
     Obscurus umbris arborum.”

but under the fierce Castilian sun--and there are said to be 3600 hours
of sunshine in the year--the imagination produces no golden tints in the
Tagus, and trees are few. Comfort the traveller will scarcely find, but
serviceableness and courtesy on all sides. If he is wise, he will,
however, imitate the Spaniards not only a little in their dress, but
greatly in their manners. He will arm himself with an inalienable fund
of patience. He will be courteous even while chafing at delay. His
courtesy will never go unanswered. “_La cortesía tenerla con quien la
tenga_, Courtesy to him who has it,” as one of Calderón’s characters
says. Money often obtains much, but the offer of a cigarette or a cigar
is often not less effective. Without a courteous manner the money will
be treated as an insult and the cigar refused. Calderón says again: “_El
sombrero y el dinero son los que hacen amigos_, Raising the hat and
money make most friends.” Few peoples respect themselves more than the
Spanish, and they look for respect from others. “The sensitive Spaniard
bristles up like a porcupine against the suspicion of a disdain.” They
do not forget that they were once the greatest people in Europe, and
they regard it as an accident that the march of modern civilization has
left them behind, being, indeed, too mechanical for their pride to
adopt. And still the golden rule for the traveller in Spain is never to
be in a hurry or never to show that he is in a hurry, for by doing so he
will increase delays and defeat his object. He must learn the Spanish
proverb thoroughly--_Paciencia y barajar_, “Patience, and shuffle the
cards.” Patience and courtesy he will find to be above rubies. The
Spaniard, so sensitive and excitable, remains unmoved by delays and
petty official tyrannies which drive an Englishman into a kind of
despair and fury of impatience.[50] But the lower officials in Spain are
apt to be ignorant and self-important, very official, and curt inquiries
only remind them that they represent the whole majesty of the Law and
the State; they multiply their shrugs and inscrutable _No se puede_’s.
On the other hand, a polite speech, though it occupy several of the few
minutes that the traveller may have to spare, is in Spain time well
spent and performs miracles;--if, that is, he still persists in
considering the value of time, and has not found it simpler to accept
the less accurate methods of the Spaniard. For he may ask in a
cathedral, “When is Mass going to be celebrated?” and the answer is,
“_No sé, Señor_; _Cuando vengan los canónigos_”--when it is the good
pleasure of the Canons to appear; or he may ask in a station, “When does
the train start?” and must not be surprised if the answer is again, “_No
sé, Señor_.” He had best content himself once and for all to breakfast
at five-o’clock tea, and will find consolation in the thought that here
at least there is no unseemly rush and strain, in this original and
exquisite land of To-morrow--_Mañana por la mañana_.




III

ON THE SPANISH FRONTIER


The Bidasoa, in the last part of its course, divides Spain from France.
It further divides Basque from Basque. It has thus a local and an
historic interest. It is the scene of smuggling between French and
Spanish Basques and, as a frontier river, it has seen many a quaint and
solemn episode in the past--the passage of Wellington’s troops, for
instance, in 1813, or the exchange in boats of Francis I. against two
hostages (his sons) in 1526, the King showing an eager haste to win
across the river and reach the friendly inhabitants of St. Jean de
Luz[51] and the sheltering walls of Bayonne. But it is the passing
beauty of the whole Bidasoa valley that attracts the visitor, the
loveliness of the river and the hills and the villages by the river. The
Bidasoa is beautiful during its whole course from where it rises near
the village of Maya, a little mountain stream running swiftly through
woods of oak and chestnut. At times the hills break abruptly down, the
water lies deep and dark-green beneath, and there is a look of Ullswater
about both hills and river. A little above Endarlaza the road leaves the
river, and from here may be had a glimpse of the Bidasoa of unrivalled
beauty. For it runs in a long, irregular stretch, irregular for the
rough backbones of hill covered with boulders and bushes of box. At each
hill-ridge one might expect the river to bend and vanish, but still it
appears beyond. Nearer the village of Vera it contracts to a narrower
flow, and the water lashes over rocks, magnificently white and green.
The river is known to fishermen as well as to smugglers and Carlists and
lovers of Nature. Certainly the wisest travellers, before passing on to
the bleak uplands of Castille, will stay to explore this little strip of
green country, with its fresh woods and valleys and villages full of
state and ancientry. Vera, in a sunny hollow, has an especial
fascination. The vine-covered balconies and projecting roofs keep the
houses in shade, and on two sides is the rustle and flow of water. The
houses stand on different levels, several storeys of them mounting roof
above roof from the river to the church. They are curious in their
sculptured stone, their quaint carved buttresses, their nail-studded
doors or rounded arches leading to the outer court, their crazy wooden
balconies, their coats-of-arms, their inscriptions. At the very
entrance of the Bidasoa stands Fuenterrabía, beneath gently sloping
Jaizquibel. It is a little town of marvellous, narrow streets, steep and
crooked, and overjutting houses carved in wood and stone. In front is a
little bay, black with fishing-boats, and seen from across the water,
Fuenterrabía’s clustered group of houses, yellow and brown and grey,
crowned by the ancient church and tenth-century castle, is of a rare and
enchanting beauty. Not only a narrow strip of river, but several
centuries separate it from Hendaye opposite, with its shore on the
Bidasoa and its shore on the sea, and its woods above the river, crowded
in spring with daffodils. The sudden change from everything that is
French to everything that is Spanish cannot but be surprising. It is
due, no doubt, to the fact that beneath the French and the Spanish
civilization and language, the people have an older language and
civilization common to either side. The Basque spoken varies but little,
being merely a little broader in Spain than in France. Mme. d’Aulnoy
noticed the abrupt change wrought by a few yards of travel. “It’s
certain, as soon as I past the little river of Bidassoa, I was not
understood unless I spake Castilian; and not above a quarter of an Hour
before I should not have been understood had I not spoke French.”[52]
Obstacles and delays begin: “Here are Toll-gatherers who make you pay
for everything you carry with you, not excepting your Cloaths. This Tax
is demanded at their Pleasure and is excessive on Strangers.” Letters
are no longer received in a well-ordered service: “There is in this
country a very ill order touching commerce, and when the French carrier
arrives at St. Sebastian, all the letters he brings are deliver’d to
others who are good footmen and ease one another. They put their packets
into a sack tied with rotten cords to their shoulder, by which means it
oft happens that the secrets of your heart and family are open to the
first curious body who makes drunk the Footpost.” Mme. d’Aulnoy is
irritated by the unintelligibility of Basque: “This country called
Biscaye is full of high mountains where are several iron mines.[53] The
Biscays climb up the rocks as easily and with as great swiftness as
stags. Their language (if one may call such jargon language) is very
poor, seeing one word signifies abundance of things. There are none but
those born in the country that can understand it; and I am told that to
the end it may be more particularly theirs they make no use of it in
writing: they make their children learn to read and write French and
Spanish according to which King’s subjects they are.” “They are said to
understand one another,” said Scaliger of the Basques, “but, for my
part, I doubt it.” The most famous scene of peace witnessed by the
Bidasoa was the meeting held in the _Île des Faisans_, or _de la
Conférence_, a narrow island, now worn to a mere strip by the flow of
the tide, between Philip IV. of Spain and Louis XIV. of France in 1660.
It was a scene of lavish splendour and magnificence, and Velázquez, then
in the last year of his life, superintended the decorations and
assisted at the interview.[54] But most often we hear of the Bidasoa as
a scene of strife and anxiety, escape and pursuit. The very river was an
object of dispute between the Governments of France and Spain, until it
was decided that the one half of it belonged to France, the other to
Spain; in the centre of the bridge of Béhobie is the dividing line,
marked in blue for France and red for Spain. Many a time has the sight
of its waters, flowing swiftly to the sea, been welcomed by men in
danger of life and liberty. Colonel Péroz[55] has graphically described
his escape by swimming the river during the last Carlist war. On May 5,
1808, Marbot reached the Bidasoa, after riding day and night through
hostile country to bring the Emperor (then at the Château de Marrac,
near Bayonne) news of the _Dos de Mayo_ rising at Madrid. At the
beginning of November Napoleon himself crossed the frontier, and as he
rode rapidly along the _route d’Espagne_ and beneath the Church of
Urrugne, with its ancient, sad inscription,[56] little thought that the
enterprise upon which he was now engaged was to be a main cause in
bringing him swiftly to the last hour that kills.

In the Middle Ages the pilgrims to the shrine of Santiago went through
the Basque country and across the frontier in fear of their lives. The
Basques were fierce and brave, and fond of plunder. In 1120 a Bishop was
obliged to lay aside his episcopal robes, and taking with him only two
servants and a guide who understood the “barbarous tongue of the
Basques,” so passed through to Compostella. In later times the pilgrims
would sing, as they left Irun,--

    “Adieu la France jolie
     Et les nobles fleurs de lys
     Car je m’en vais en Espagne,
     C’est un étrange pays,”

and would look back with sighs to the good cheer of France:

    “Quand nous fûmes á Saint Jean de Luz[57]
     Les biens de Dieu en abondance,
     Car ce sont gens de Dieu élus,
     Des charités ont souvenance.”

The older way into Spain was the Roman road from Dax to S. Jean Pied de
Port and Roncesvalles--where, indeed, and not “by Fontarabia,”
Charlemagne was attacked by the Basques;[58] but often this road was
rendered impassable by war. In the middle of the 12th century the French
Basque country passed, with the rest of Aquitaine, into the possession
of the English Crown, and henceforth many were the battles and frontier
raids between the Basques on either side. In 1296 we read of a truce in
the quarrels between San Sebastian and “Fuent Arrabia,” and of an
agreement made between them not to “send or take bread, or wine, or
meat, or arms or horses, or other merchandise to Bayonne, or England, or
Flanders while the war lasts between the King of France and the King of
England.” On July 19, 1311, a peace is made between Bayonne and Biarritz
(Beiarritz) on the one hand, and Laredo, Castro-Urdiales, and Santander
on the other. A few years later we find the King of Castille writing to
the King of England to complain of the seizure of the goods of his
vassals of Biscay by the Seneschal of Aquitaine, “against all right and
reason.” As often before and after “en ce temps avoit grand rancune
entre le roy d’Angleterre et les Espagnols.” In 1352 a treaty is formed
between “England and the people of the coast of Cantabria,” who were
famous for their prowess in catching whales, as well as in frontier
warfare, and came into rivalry with English fishermen. In 1482 “amicable
intelligences” are concluded at Westminster between “Edward, by the
Grace of God King of England and France and Lord of Ireland” and “the
inhabitants of the noble and loyal Province of Guipúzcoa.”[59] During
the 17th century the frontier raids continued, and in 1636 (as before in
1558) the town of St. Jean de Luz was taken and pillaged by the
Spaniards. Up in the hills, near the little village of Sare, the
Spaniards of Vera were defeated, and Sare still displays on the walls of
its _mairie_ the coat-of-arms given by Louis XIV. after the victory won
by the bravery of its inhabitants, with the following inscription in
Basque:--“Reward of courage and loyalty, given to Sare by Louis XIV. in
1693.”[60] In the Peninsular War, Sare and its mountain, La Rhune,
played a prominent part, and many a vivid description, such as the
following, occurs in Napier:--“Day had broken with great splendour, and
three guns were fired as signal of attack from Atchuria. The French were
driven from La Rhune, Sare was carried, and the enemy brushed away from
Ainhoa and Urdax: “It was now eight o’clock, and from the smaller
Rhune[61] a splendid spectacle of war opened upon the view. On the left
the ships of war, slowly sailing to and fro, were exchanging shots with
the fort of Socoa, and Hope, menacing all the French lines on the low
ground, sent the sound of a hundred pieces of artillery bellowing up the
rocks, to be answered by nearly as many from the tops of the mountains.
On the right the summit of the great Atchuria[62] was just lighted by
the rising sun, and fifty thousand men rushing down its enormous slopes
with ringing shouts seemed to chase the receding shadows into the deep
valley.” The description of the passage of the Bidasoa in October, 1813,
is equally graphic: “From San Marcial seven columns could now be seen at
once, moving on a line of five miles, those above bridge plunging at
once into the fiery contest, those below appearing in the distance like
huge, sullen snakes winding over the heavy sands.” The mountainous
character of the frontier, causing Spain to be entered by one or two
narrow passages, has indeed concentrated upon a few points a picturesque
variety of traffic through the centuries--a historical pageant of
soldiers, pilgrims, smugglers, Kings and Queens dethroned or released
from imprisonment, wily agents, gorgeous ambassadors, fugitive
politicians, exiled Jesuits, heretic missionaries, Carlist conspirators,
with a large sprinkling of visitors and adventurers from many lands.




IV

ESKUAL-ERRIA


I.--BASQUE COUNTRY

There are few peoples more deserving of study than the Basques, and few
countries more pleasant to visit and to live in than the Basque
Provinces. After the treeless, unsheltered mountains and plains, and the
compact villages of Castille or Navarre, the villages of the Basque
country, set in green, and, to quote the phrase of a Spanish novelist,
“all in the peace of prayer,” are a delightful contrast. The sky has no
longer the harsh intensity of the Castilian, and everywhere is a
softness of outlines; everywhere, too, is green--the green of chestnut
and oak, of maize and trefoil, meadow and cider-orchard. The maize is
the principal crop of the year, providing the heavy, yellow bread,
_artoa_, as well as food for the oxen and material for mats, mattresses,
and even cigarette-papers. The fields are divided by slabs of stone, and
in the mists of the early mornings the Angelus rings from hidden towers;
and the only other sound is that of scythes cutting the drenched grass
or trefoil. Every true Basque is of noble, ancient family, and the
Basque farmhouse, with its wooden façade and carved projecting
buttresses, its wide balcony and deep ornamented eaves, is handed down
from father to son without change. It stands surrounded by orchards and
fields of maize, and often overshadowed by an immense fig-tree or a
group of splendid walnut-trees. The roof slopes down on one side till it
nearly reaches the ground. The lower part of the front is hollowed into
a court, and on one side of this a door leads straight into the spacious
kitchen, with its huge fireplace and many vessels of scoured bronze and
copper, which forms the principal room of the house. A dark, narrow
staircase leads to the bedrooms; through the cracks of the floors may
often be seen the oxen in their stalls beneath. Large chests of oak,
some of them beautifully carved, are to be found in most Basque farms.
In Vizcaya a large vine-trellis, running forward on posts from the inner
court beneath the balcony, further deepens the dark velvet spaces in the
whitewashed front of the farm; in Guipúzcoa many houses have no balcony
or trellis, but are overgrown with heavy vines, that often entirely
cover all the windows. From the windows hang long strings of red piments
or white onions; above the door there is frequently an ancient stone
coat-of-arms or an inscription with the name of the founders and the
date, and above this a cross or the letters I. H. S. The house is thus
half sacred. After the father’s death, the eldest son becomes “Lord of
the house, etcheco-jauna,” while the younger sons often emigrate.

It was from their farms, so dear to them, that the Basques formerly took
their names, so that they are called not Smith or Collier, but
At-the-head-of-the-hill (Mendiburu) or Under-the-new-road (Bideberripe).
Even now a Basque in the country is never called by his surname, but
either by his Christian name or a nickname, or the name of his house or
property. Etche (“house”) is perhaps the commonest compound. Etcheberri
(“newhouse”) has numerous variants--Echeverri, Echevarri, Echavarri (in
Vizcaya and Alava, where the Basque spoken is broader than in Guipúzcoa,
new is “barri”), Chavarri, Echarri, Echave, Xavier, Javer, etc. The
number of Basque-speaking people can now but little exceed half a
million, and only very rarely is a Basque found who is unable to speak
Spanish or French.[63] Of the three Spanish-Basque provinces, Guipúzcoa
(capital San Sebastián) alone is entirely Basque. At Bilbao, the capital
of Vizcaya, no Basque is spoken; and long before reaching Vitoria, the
capital of Alava, the language spoken is Castilian. Nor is Basque spoken
at Pamplona, the capital of Navarre, though it reaches almost to its
walls, and till quite recently had a wider extension in Navarre, names
of places such as Mendigorria (“red mountain”) surviving. The difficulty
of the language has been somewhat exaggerated; there is a well-known
story that the Devil spent three years in the Basque country, and only
succeeded in learning two words: _Bai_, “yes;” and _Es_, “no.” But it
remains true that the immense and complicated system of Basque
conjugations is for a foreigner almost impossible to master; and at the
same time the Basque literature to reward the learner is of the
scantiest. Interesting indeed are the proverbs, some of the songs, and
the pastorales, which have been compared in more than one particular
with the Greek drama, but which are now acted only in the province of
Soule. The stage, in the open air, is formed of plain planks, supported
most often on barrels. A curtain cuts off a part for the actors to
change their costumes, the same person often taking several parts in a
play. The curtain has two doors, one for the good and one for the
wicked. The good and the wicked are kept strictly separate. The
pastorale is always in honour of Christianity and the Roman Catholic
religion, and the wicked are the heathen, the Turks, the English, etc.
Red is the colour of the wicked, that of the good is blue; in this
respect no change is ever made. The good always walk slowly and
solemnly, but when the wicked come on the stage the music is immediately
changed to a lively air, and they never remain long quiet, their
movements continuing quick and agitated. The acting is very simple; a
journey, for instance, is represented by walking up and down the stage
several times. The characters are usually taken exclusively by men and
boys, but there are a few pastorales acted by women only; the sexes are
never mingled. Strange and amusing anachronisms abound. In the
pastorale entitled _Abraham_, Abraham appears in high boots and felt
hat; Sarah in a modern, bright-coloured dress, with hat, veil, and fan;
Isaac carries one or two sticks on his shoulder for the sacrifice; the
Angel is a little boy in white. Then there are the heathen and the
Christian kings, the former dressed in red, with high crowns arrayed
with plumes and ribbons, the latter in blue with crowns of gold. In the
middle of the play one of the Christian kings leaves the stage, and
presently appears above the curtain and speaks with Abraham. He
represents the “Eternal Father.” The verses are spoken in a loud
monotonous chant, each verse being literally measured out by motion up
and down the stage, the only change being when the music becomes faster
or slower. The music is composed of the two Basque instruments the
_churula_, a shrill pipe, and the _tamboril_, a kind of guitar with six
strings, played by the same person. The strangeness of the scene, the
loud chanting of the actors as the tone rises and falls, the fantastic
costumes, the dances of the “Satans,” the prayers of the Christians, and
especially the slow march and action of the blues, dignified and
majestic, and the turbulent, restless movements of the reds, are not
soon forgotten.

The Basque language, _Eskuara_, was described by the Spanish historian,
Mariana, as “coarse and barbarous,” and a traveller among the Basques in
the Middle Ages recorded that to hear them speak one would say they were
dogs barking. In English, the word “jingo” has been said to derive from
the Basque _Jincoa_, “God,” introduced by Wellington’s troops after the
Peninsular War. The Basque word is an abbreviation of _Jaungoicoa_, “the
Lord on high,” _jauna_, “lord,” being the common form of greeting
between peasant and peasant. It becomes more and more rare to hear pure
Basque spoken; foreign words creep in and, with the definite article
“_a_” suffixed, hide under a Basque form: _dembora_ (Lat. _tempus_) thus
ousting the Basque word _eguraldia_ for “weather,” _gorphuntza_ (Lat.
_corpus_) being “body,” and so on.[64] Pure Basque recedes to remote
villages in the mountains, and there the Basque maintains his ancient
customs, as averse from change to-day as when Horace described him as
“Cantabrum indoctum juga ferre nostra.”[65]


II.--BASQUE CUSTOMS

An old Latin account speaks of the Basques as going nowhere--not even to
church--without arms, usually a bow and arrows, and says that they are
“gens affabilis, elegans et hilaris--courteous, graceful, and
light-hearted;”[66] but, in spite of their known hospitality, their
distrust of the foreigner and their hatred of intrusion are shown in
more than one of their proverbs, as “The stranger-guest does not work
himself, and prevents you from working.” The Basques are, indeed, the
most energetic, as they are the most ancient people of the Peninsula.
“Naguia bethi lansu--The idle man is ever busy,” says another of their
proverbs; and, again, “Idle youth brings needy old age.”[67] Their
fields are well and economically cultivated, and if their methods are
antiquated, this is partly due to the mountainous nature of the country
and the smallness of the holdings, making it simpler, _e.g._, to thresh
corn by beating it sheaf by sheaf against a stone. Numerous small
factories--of cloth as at Vergara, of paper at Tolosa, of iron and
steel at Eibar and Elgoibar, of furniture at Azpeitia--and many quarries
and tile-factories prove their industry; and entering a small Basque
town such as Elgoibar, one may hear in tiny shops on all sides the sound
of sandal-makers and workers in wood and leather. They know how to work,
and they know how to enjoy themselves with thoroughness at the village
fêtes. From dawn to dusk the ball is to be heard against the wall of the
pelota court on Sundays, with intervals of dancing to the shrill pipe
and drum of the _chunchunero_. Voltaire, thinking of their love of
dancing, described them as “un petit peuple qui danse sur les Pyrénées,”
and certain dances still survive. The sword-dance, _ezpata danza_, is
one of the most remarkable, and has been described by Pierre Loti in
“Figures et choses qui passaient;” and other dances are those
representing the primitive methods of agriculture, the vintage, weaving,
etc. The Basque pelota has, unfortunately, become, of recent years, a
game of professionals, and as played, _e.g._, at Madrid, the interest is
rather in the betting than in the play. The enthusiasm formerly excited
among the Basques by the game is illustrated by the story that several
Basque soldiers left the Army of the Rhine, returned to their country to
play a game of ball, and, having played and won it, rejoined the army in
time to take part in the battle of Austerlitz.[68] A game played in the
immense court of a small Basque village is still a splendid sight,
though it has lost much of its splendour, and the old Rebot is fast
dying out. Pierre Loti has described a game of Blaid, as seen in a
French-Basque village, in his novel of the Basque country, “Ramuntcho”;
and this form of the game has been played in Paris and London. But old
peasants will shake their heads and say it is no longer “as of old.” The
expression “of old” is common on the lips of both French and Spanish
Basques;[69] they willingly praise the past, and are intensely
conservative of all their customs, their immemorial language, their
games, privileges, religion. The ox-carts, with wheels of solid wood, to
be seen under the vine-trellises of Basque farms, seem as old as the
withered trunk of the oak of Guernica, and similarly many ancient
customs have been retained. In some parts, at funerals, the men wear
long cloaks reaching to the feet, the women also wearing long, full
cloaks with hoods, that completely hide the face. The men go first, and
then all the women--men and women in single file--the chief mourners
coming last. Both at weddings and funerals, feasts were formerly given
on such an extensive scale that the family was often nearly ruined, and
a law (_fuero_) was passed forbidding to invite any but relations to the
third degree. But the wedding-feast is still sufficiently imposing; it
continues for many hours, and immediately afterwards the young begin
dancing, while the old play cards. As to the offerings at funerals,
“none but an eye-witness,” says Larramendi, in the eighteenth century,
“could believe the quantity of bread and wax that is offered. Moreover,
at these big funerals, in some places a live ox, and in others a sheep,
is brought as an offering to the church door, and when the service is
over it is taken away, and a fixed sum of money is given to the
priest.”[70] This curious custom, a survival of the offerings to the
dead and a trace of ancestor-worship, has not yet wholly died out. In
one village at least (Arriba, on the borders of Navarre and Guipúzcoa)
it is customary at funerals to offer bread and wax, and to bring to the
church either a quarter of veal or a live sheep, which is afterwards
given to the priest. The Basques are intensely religious, and it is
characteristic of them that before they were converted to Christianity
they were the terror of the Christians--indeed, the pilgrims to Santiago
de Compostella at all times feared the passage through the Basque
Provinces, the strange language adding to their difficulties (“La
Biscaye,” they said, “où il y a d’étrange monde, où l’on n’entend pas
les gens”). The Basques troop in to early Mass every Sunday, often by
rough mountain paths, from farms lying a league away. Yet it must not be
thought that the Basques are priest-ridden; the priests are respected,
and often take part in their games or walk many miles across the hills
to visit the sick. But though the Basques are often narrow and
fanatical, they have far too much dignity and independence to be the
blind followers of the priests. In the Carlist wars they fought chiefly
for their old privileges, or _fueros_, and the result of the wars was
that nearly all their _fueros_ were lost, in 1839 and 1876. “Nothing is
so fair as liberty,” says one of their songs, and their national song,
“Guernikako Arbola,”[71] with its stirring air, celebrates “the holy
tree of Guernica, loved by all the Basques.” In the little green-set
town of Guernica a fine new oak, some forty years old, has taken the
place of the old tree, now a mere trunk protected by glass, while in the
little pillared temple are still to be seen the seven marble seats on
which assembled--

    “Peasant and lord in their appointed seat,
     Guardians of Biscay’s ancient liberty.”

These are the two last lines of Wordsworth’s sonnet to the

    “Oak of Guernica! Tree of holier power
     Than that which in Dodona did enshrine,
     So faith too fondly deemed, a voice divine.”

Noble, handsome, graceful in all their movements, hardy and shrewd, the
Basques are active and untiring whether as farmers, smugglers, soldiers,
or _pelotaris_. They live aloof in scattered farms, a healthy open-air
life (their word for rich is _aberatz_, from _abere_, head of cattle),
and, indeed, in a town they tend to lose some of their good qualities.
Their dress has always an air of careful neatness and distinction, with
the _béret_, white shirt (without a tie), dark blue or black coat thrown
over shoulder (or long blouse), silent sandals and the peculiar
_makhila_, a stout iron-pointed stick of medlar. They are shrinking into
their mountains, a race doomed to perish, “un peuple qui s’en va.” They
have watched during thousands of years new races spring up and prosper
around them, and in the twentieth century they see trains and motors
penetrate to the inaccessible places where the Roman legions were
checked, or Charlemagne with all his peerage fell. An inscription here
and there shows them bowing to destiny and the relentless march of time
in saddened resignation, or betaking themselves to the consolation of
their religion--the following inscriptions, for instance, along the
frontier: “Man is beaten by every hour, and the last leads him to the
grave.”[72] “Vulnerant omnes, ultima necat.”[73] “Ici fait l’home cequi
pevt et fortune ce que elle vevt.”[74] “Post fata resurgo.”[75] “Deum
time, Mariam invoca.”[76] “Orhoit hilcea.”[77] The privileges that
remain to the Basques are few, consisting in a slightly less acute
centralization than obtains in other provinces of Spain.[78] They have
no _fueros_ left to make it worth their while to take up arms afresh,
and they still have vivid memories of their wasted fields and desolate
farms in the last Carlist war. But were their ancient religion to be
really attacked, or were an attempt made to expel the monks from the
Basque provinces, the peasants could be counted upon to make a desperate
resistance, more in defence of their independence than on behalf of the
monks themselves. Foreigners have often misunderstood the Basques,[79]
for they are reserved and silent towards the new-comer (“Gizonciki
arabotz andi,” they say--“Little man, much noise”; “the empty barrel
makes the most noise,” and so on). But there is no suspicion of
commercialism about their love of liberty such as has often been
attributed to the Catalans: they love their beautiful land, the
Eskual-erria, for its own sake and the religion and customs of their
forefathers, and the strangers who visit their country soon learn to
love and admire its broad healing power and spirit of ancient peace. It
is a country of civilization without great cities, where exists an
intimate and ennobling relation between the soil and the inhabitants.




V

IN REMOTE NAVARRE


Navarre is held to be one of the chief bulwarks of Clericalism in Spain,
and so remote and isolated are its villages, so primitive its life and
agriculture, so few its means of communication, that it might seem that
no breath of modern times could have penetrated to this province. Lying
on the frontier of France, it is defended from the inroads of
civilization by its mountains and wide wastes of desert land. In those
lonely groups of houses of massive yellow-brown stone, clustered around
their church, and crowning rocky hills of the same colour, there is no
room for differences of opinion, and he who does not attend Mass at
least once in the year is forced to go and live elsewhere. Should you
ask how he can be forced to go, the answer you will receive is, “By the
law, by public opinion.” Quite recently a traveller, arriving famished
at one of these villages of Navarre, with no smaller change than a
French napoleon, went from door to door in vain. No one would accept
this _doblón de oro_ (gold doubloon). Finally, a woman who had lived
for a time at Salies de Béarn consented to receive it, and sent it later
to be changed at the capital, Pamplona. Yet even here in Navarre there
is an appreciable body of liberal opinion, and even in the heart of the
Carlist country, at Estella, the Club Carlista is faced by the ensign of
the Círculo Liberal; even here in all but the smaller villages opinion
is divided, and the policy of Clericals and anti-Clericals discussed
with animation. Those who served in the second Carlist war recognize
that the times have altered, and that leaders, or _cabecillas_, are no
longer forthcoming to lead them in swift night marches across the hills,
willing though they might be to follow. At Estella a fort taken by the
Carlists is now a peaceful covered market-place, and the palace where
Don Carlos held his court is a pleasant _fonda_ with a cool _patio_ of
flowers. Those who enter Navarre by the Convent of Roncesvalles and the
Pass where Roland was slain, and which Byng a thousand years later, in
1813, was forced to evacuate with ten thousand troops, may be easily
deceived into imagining that Navarre is a land of meadows and green
woods and pleasant streams. The swift river Urrobi runs through passes
of rugged hills, but overgrown with box and beech trees and pines. Steep
walls of rock are in summer covered with foxgloves and bramble and
broom, scabious, St. John’s wort, mallow, bell heather, and many other
flowers and ferns, and in places the hills are red with wild
strawberries. The Urrobi forces its way through barriers of grey rock
and over ledges in green pools and white rushing torrents. But this is
not the true Navarre. There no trees are to be seen, and one is
perpetually in a wide circle of bare hills. The country is the most
desolate imaginable, formed by bare, ashen-grey hills (scored and gashed
by dry torrent-beds) and valleys equally barren. The wind hisses, and
crickets chatter loudly in a few stunted elms by the roadside. All is
greyness without colour, and in late summer the stubble-fields far and
near add a new note of desolation, and it seems out of keeping with the
character of the country that these fields should ever be a fresh green
in spring. Indeed, the occasional hollows of olives and plots of
vineyards have an air of unreality in the surrounding wilderness of
crumbling dust and shale. Yet some welcome patches of colour are to be
found, if it is only a line of chicory or of huge purple thistles along
a stubble-field, or a blue-bloused peasant jogging down the dusty road
on a mule with crimson trappings. And on the threshing-floors around the
villages, where work is carried on far into the night, often by
lightning flash, the white shirts and blue blouses of the men, and the
pink and red dresses and long white headkerchiefs of the women form a
picturesque and beautiful scene through the clouds of flying chaff and
ruddy golden grain falling in heavier, more compact masses. For here the
threshing is all done by hand with the help of mules, oxen, and horses,
which are driven round and round, drawing all the children of the
village on little wooden sledges. When the grain has been thus sifted,
the process is completed by throwing it into the air from long wooden
shovels and close-pronged wooden forks. The corn is grown on precipices
and sheer mountain-sides, and is brought down to the threshing-floors on
donkeys, which disappear beneath their rustling load. The men who live
in this grim country are also stern and grim, harsh featured, hard, and
strong; and, though hospitable and not unkindly, they are fierce and
obstinate upon occasion, and sometimes cruel to their animals. Their
food is rough, but not unplentiful; of wheat there is no lack, and with
some vines and olives they are content to have the three necessities of
a Spanish peasant’s life. The villages would often pass unnoticed on
their rocky hills were it not for the outstanding feature of their grim,
massive churches; the church of Gallipienzo dominates a mountain, and is
so solid and fine that it seems to dwarf it. These churches are to be
seen for very many miles across the completely bare country, and at
night the lights of the village streets form, from long distances,
strange, irregular letters on a mountain-side, making the village far
more conspicuous than it would be by day. Sansol, a little village not
far from Logroño, looks from some distance like a great fortress of
brown stone with tiny black loop-holes (the glassless windows); behind
is a long backbone of grey, rocky hill, and beyond the purple-black
Monte Jura with a glimpse of white road. Bitter and fierce are the
winters in Navarre, and pitiless the sun in summer; but for all its
forbidding aspects it repays the discomforts of a visit to its remote
districts. Lumbier is like a miniature Toledo, on its bare hill above
the winding river, and Sanguesa, of brown yellow stone, on the Aragón,
of the same colour, has its magnificently sculptured church of Santa
María, and other beautiful carvings on private houses. And after a few
weeks’ acquaintance with the harsh country and the proud inhabitants,
the traveller will realize the possibility of those relentless Carlist
wars which still send a thrill through those who recall them, and the
difficulty of hunting down _cabecillas_ who knew the country and of
bringing the war to an end.




VI

SPANISH CITIES


Spain is pre-eminently a land of cities. Often they stand conspicuous in
an arid and treeless tract of country, glancing like jewels in a
sunburnt land. The pleasant and fertile strip of country, on the French
frontier is not properly Spanish, but Basque. On the other hand, nothing
could be more Spanish than the little quaint old town of Fuenterrabía.
The original name was Basque--Ondarrabia, “The two banks of sand.” The
Romans, hearing the name, but ignorant of its meaning and seeing,
moreover, the swift flow of the tide beneath the walls of the town,
called it Unda Rapida.[80] From the Latin Unda Rapida or Fons Rapidus
came the Spanish Fuenterrabía,[81] and the French in their turn,
connecting it with the Arabs, called it Fontarabie. The Basque name is,
however, still in use, and one of the streets of Irun where, as in many
other towns and villages, the street names are written up both in
Spanish and Basque, has the full-sounding name Ondarrabiko Karreka--the
street of Ondarrabia. If one may compare small things with great, the
cities of Northern Spain are like castles built by children in the sand,
and left high and dry by the receding tide. City after city stood walled
and bulwarked on the extreme fringe of the Christian territory, for a
time the court and capital of Spain, till a fresh conquest drove back
the Moors a lap further south. This in part accounts for the grim and
wonderful Spanish cities, with their magnificent buildings and
fortifications, that still exist, but exist with no longer the stir of a
great destiny within their walls, but merely as it were the mighty
shells of an extinct life. So Burgos, León, Toledo, were capital cities
for a space, thronged with the busy traffic of courtiers and warriors,
and Avila, the city of saints, has the great fortifications of a
frontier town. It is difficult to believe that Toledo has at all changed
since the Cid’s horse miraculously stayed before the burning light
hidden in the wall of one of its streets, and the water-carriers to-day
go leisurely down to the river, their donkeys’ panniers laden with
earthen jars, as when Cervantes wrote “La Ilustre Fregona.” And, indeed,
Spanish cities are little liable to change. The steep uneven ways of
Toledo and Salamanca and Segovia scorn modern traffic. The passing of a
carriage is possible in the main streets, but is a rare event that
rattles and reverberates along the walls. More suitable are the stately
processions, their banners showing brightly against the brown-yellow
buildings. Segovia has been called the queen of Castilian cities, as
Toledo is the king. And Segovia must ever remain mediæval, a city of a
hundred levels, sinking by terraces of half-ruinous walls, tufted with
grass and flowers, from the Cathedral down to the foot of its mighty
Roman aqueduct. A Latin author three hundred years ago wrote that “in
Segovia nemo otiosus, nemo mendicus”--there were no beggars at Segovia.
It would be unsafe to assert this of any Spanish town to-day. Spain is
no country of “neat cities and populous towns full of most industrious
artificers.” Such towns--Barcelona,[82] Bilbao--there are, but mostly
the cities are, in the words of Burton, “cities decayed,” which contain
many “Spanish loiterers,” though they are not “base and poor towns,” nor
are the people “squalid, ugly, uncivil.” The southern cities show a
softer influence. The surrounding country is less abrupt and harsh, and
the stern features of the north are forgotten. Cadiz lies out into the
sea, a Spanish Venice, cut in straight white streets, like the slices of
an iced cake. Seville is wonderful at all times, a _maravilla_ to
foreigners and Spaniards. The Spanish novelist Palacio Valdés, in “La
Hermana San Sulpicio,” has described it during nights of midsummer, when
to go through the city was to visit the interior of the houses, for from
the _patios_, where the families were assembled, great rays of light
shot through the iron screen-doors into the dark and stifled streets,
and guitar and song broke the stillness: “Seville at such an hour had a
magical look, a charm that disturbed the mind.” But of all the cities of
the south Granada has a peculiar fascination. This is largely due to its
many contrasts. It is a city of orange groves and fountains, yet it
lies over two thousand feet above sea-level, and is a summer rather than
a winter city; the fiercest heat is relieved by cool air from the
eternal snows of the Sierra Nevada, and the gardens of the Alhambra and
the Generalife, with their myrtles, cypresses and cedars, give a
delicious shade. In winter icy cold strikes through the marble halls of
the Alhambra; yet it is never more beautiful than seen in February from
San Cristobal, or from the cactus-covered hill beneath San Miguel, or
from where the Darro flows rapidly far below. For it rises above the
slender branches of elms and poplars, grey and in parts purple from
their swelling buds--the red and yellow-brown towers, the crumbling
walls of red earth and brick and large smooth rounded stones of white,
or black, or red, the trailing ivy, the open white-pillared galleries. A
few almond-trees are in flower, and above to the left stand the long
lines of cypresses of the grey-white Generalife, where flower celandines
and daffodils. Many of these Spanish cities are visited chiefly for
their great ancient buildings and Cathedrals; yet the most part of them
deserve a more patient study for their own sake, for their memories of
old, and for the life of their narrow winding streets. The Spanish
writer _Azorín_ (Martínez Ruiz), in a book of few pages,[83] conveys
some wonderfully clear-cut impressions of Spain. He turns with
preference to details of the centuries of Spain’s greatness, when
Murcia, Valencia, and Seville were famous for their silks, Talavera for
its earthenware, Toledo for its swords, when the gloves of Ocaña or the
spurs of Ajofrín were unrivalled; or to the survival of old Spain in a
picture, or a building, or a city. Thus he loves to wander through León
with its spirit of ancient Spain and its classical street-names--here a
cobbled grass-grown _plaza_ with pale acacias and ancient walls, the
slow flight of doves and the wind rustling torn pieces of paper; there a
quiet convent _patio_ with bays and rigid cypresses. For him the narrow
streets of Córdoba have a deeper charm than those of any other Spanish
city. He wanders through the labyrinth of intricate winding ways, with
glimpses of small pillared _patios_ of flowers and fountains, and finds
everywhere silence and a deep serene melancholy, restfulness, oblivion,
and a harmony of soft shades, nowhere the light-hearted frivolity
conventionally attributed to Andalucía. _Azorín’s_ originality consists
in forcing a few apparently insignificant details to yield the whole
spirit of a city, a country, a people. If he mentions the Mosque of
Córdoba, it is but to note the beggars taking the sun in the _Patio de
los Naranjos_, the sparrows twittering in the orange-trees, the sound of
pitchers filling at the fountain. He gives us poignant descriptions of
dead provincial cities and ruined ancestral houses. The decadence of
Spain brought flourishing cities to low estate: Spain’s revival menaces
them with a fresh ruin. Old narrow passages and intricate courts and
sculptured houses make place for the introduction of tramways and broad
asphalt streets. The old Santander described by Pereda survives only in
his books, the old parts of Barcelona and Valencia are fast
disappearing, and happy is the city such as Toledo whose position on
abrupt rocks with no level spaces seems to promise an eternity of
mediævalism and individuality.




VII

IN OLD CASTILLE


It is with astonishment and a kind of fear that the traveller passes
through the high-lying plains of Old Castille, journeying swiftly from
city to city, to

    “Old towns whose history lies hid
     In monkish chronicle or rhyme,
     Burgos, the birthplace of the Cid,
     Zamora and Valladolid....”

for in these intervening tracts, sun-parched and windswept, it seems
scarcely possible that men should live. The villages are closely huddled
together, little compact masses of low, unwhitewashed houses, without a
tree or garden, so colourless, and clinging to the soil as sometimes to
pass unnoticed. Rivers flow between low, bare banks without bush or
tree, like streaks of mother-of-pearl inlaid in earthenware. And there
are wide tracts of land without a house or boundary, a continuous
desolation with no signs of life, except here and there a flock of sheep
or herd of goats, or a line of peasants returning at sunset from their
work. Surely life here can have but few attractions; there can be no
joy of the soil, little temptation for Berceo’s “_mal labrador_” of the
thirteenth century, who “loved the earth more than he loved the
Creator,” and “would alter landmarks to enlarge his estate”--_cambiaba
los mojones por ganar eredat_. Yet the slower trains are invaded by a
merry throng of pleasant, courteous, good-looking peasants, oval-faced,
with splendid teeth and eyelashes, who speed the journey with gay
conversation and shrill singing, and pass constantly from one carriage
to another to greet friends or to avoid the officials who inquire
awkwardly after tickets. They have plenty of life and cheerfulness, and
it is with renewed wonder that one looks at the dead, crumbling villages
where they live, and remembers the piercing force of the Castilian sun
in summer and the icy, penetrating winter winds. All day they must work
without the shelter of a single hedge or tree in the searching wind[84]
that sifts the soil, or under a sun that parches and shrivels it into
dust. But a nearer acquaintance reveals a certain charm[85] about these
villages of hard, clear names: Campillo, Cantalapedra, Pedroso,
Madrigal--a charm of clean-swept spaces, and clear, luminous air and
silent intensity; and the country ceases to be uniformly colourless.
Here a woman in a dress of light-blue linen, with long flowing
headkerchief of white, passes on a donkey through fields of golden ripe
corn; there, from narrow windows in a street of yellow-brown houses,
hang bright patches of geraniums and carnations in flower. And the
doorways of square or round or pointed arches give entrance to cool,
silent courts. _Azorín_ has described the old Castilian hidalgo, who
has never left his ancestral house, with its large rooms, many of them
unfurnished, and old portraits consigned to an attic and covered with
the dust of centuries: “His lands have disappeared, his furniture has
disappeared; he does nothing; he has a sad intensity of expression,” and
when further misfortune befalls him he says, “There is no help for
it--_qué le vamos á hacer_!” Everywhere is decay, and the trace of
vanished splendour. So these old ruined hidalgos live out their grey,
monotonous lives in some ancient town or village of Castille, amid the
immense plains with “distances of radiant sky and faint blue lines of
mountains.” The blue smoke rises from scented fires of rosemary, and, as
the bells ring to Matins, the doves swerve and circle, the grey doves
sweep slowly across the sky perpetually blue. And night and day the
doors of the houses are kept continually closed, with a deserted air
beneath the broad coats-of-arms carved in stone. _Azorín_ describes
minutely a Castilian town, standing among cornfields and olives--one of
those towns that the foreigner rarely has the courage to visit. Its
streets are narrow and tortuous. It contains three ancient inns, four
churches, three hermitages, two convents. It has no industries save a
few ruined cloth manufactures, and only the usurer flourishes. It
contains fourteen students (who have not taken their degree), four
doctors, twelve lawyers (only six of whom earn a living, and this by
slandering one another, and from time to time bringing a blackmail suit
against some poor-spirited inhabitant). There is a Guild of the Christ
of the Dying, and when a member dies a messenger goes through the
streets ringing a bell and crying: “At such an hour the funeral of Don
Fulano.” The summers are fiery, the winters are long and cruel. No
visits are paid; doors and windows remain closed; few persons go through
the streets, but in the _plazas_, on clear days of winter, dense groups
of men may be seen taking the sun, wrapped in their brown plaids and
_capas_. Nothing happens; the deep silence is broken by the clang of a
forge-hammer or by the crowing of a cock. In time of Carnival a few
“masks” pass, dressed up with mats and carrying old brooms. The
labourers are poverty-stricken, and meat is the luxury of a few “rich”
inhabitants. _Azorín_ notes the Castilian’s “fundamental energy,
aloofness, indifference, and lofty disdain, with sudden inspirations of
heroism”; and we may count it no small heroism to live on, proudly
uncomplaining, in surroundings so harsh and discomfortable.




VIII

THE DESERT AND THE SOWN


The French soldiers, looking at the trifling Manzanares and its mighty
bridges, may have exclaimed, “So even the Spanish rivers ran away.” But
those who, at sight of tiny threads of water in immense river-beds, are
inclined to ask, with Don Pedro in _Much Ado about Nothing_, “What need
the bridge much broader than the flood?” find their answer after a few
days of heavy rain. Marks six feet and more high on houses many hundreds
of yards from the banks of the Ebro record the rising of the waters.
Thus, in many districts, crops which have survived the summer drought
are swept away by the autumn deluge, and those who have cried for rain
are mocked with ruin when the waters “prevail exceedingly upon the
earth.” Spain’s agriculture perishes for lack of water, yet water
abounds, whether subterranean, as in parts of Castille, or in the
copious snows of the high-lying regions, where the snow is sometimes
preserved in snow-pits, _pozos de nieve_, or in these periodical
floods; and it would seem that the philologist had Spain in his mind
who connected the Basque adjective _idorra_, meaning “dry,” with ὓδωρ,
the Greek for water. To utilize, extend, and regulate the water
supply is a problem of vital importance to Spain--a problem which has
long occupied the thoughts of Spanish statesmen. Alfonso the Learned, in
his “Crónica General,” says, “This Spain, then, of which we speak is as
the paradise of God.... For the most part, it is watered with streams
and fountains, and wells are never lacking in all places that have need
of them;” but Strabo, more impartial, had remarked of Spain that, “For
the most part, it yields but a poor sustenance. For large districts are
composed of mountains and woodland and plains, with thin and, moreover,
not uniformly well-watered soil--οὐδἐ ταὐτην ὁμαλῶς εὔυδρον.” And
since Strabo’s time many have been the alterations for the worse.
Turdetania, for instance, the country between Seville and Huelva, is no
longer marvellously prosperous--θαυμα-στῶς εὐτυχεῖ; in fact
South Estremadura, of old one of Rome’s granaries, is now one of the
most desolate regions in Spain. But the worst decay is that of the
forests. The woods have fallen and fallen, and still the axe rings
avidly in those woods that remain. The very words for a wood, _bosque_
or _selva_, have become rare and poetical. Thus the soil is further
parched and impoverished, while towns and villages stand unsheltered
from wind and sun. The Escorial, which grew up among woods, may now be
seen from afar in its almost sinister magnificence across grey hills
and plains without a tree; and Madrid, though a tree figures prominently
in the city arms, looks out upon plains from which all traces of former
oak and chestnut forests have long since vanished. The absence of trees
in Spain increases both the dryness and the floods, and afforestation is
therefore quite as important as irrigation. The canalization of rivers
may diminish the floods, but while there is no soil on the
hill-sides--or soil so light that it is swept away by heavy
rainfalls--the rain must continue to be a blessing strangely disguised.
It is calculated that in six or eight years the trees would knit the
soil together, and give it sufficient staying power to resist and absorb
the rains, though, of course, there would as yet be no actual profit of
timber. Outlay of toil and money for so distant a remuneration is not
congenial to the Spanish temperament. The great land-owners do nothing.
The State spends a few thousand pesetas every year; but at the present
rate afforestation will need hundreds of years, bearing a resemblance to
that long-desired map of Spain, which is to be issued in some eleven
hundred sections, and of which from two to three sections appear
annually.[86] The advantages of irrigation have been amply proved in
Spain, justifying the juxtaposition of water and gold in Pindar’s ode;
but only about a fiftieth of Spain’s total area--and especially the
plain of Granada and the strip of coast of Málaga and Valencia--can at
present show the immense productiveness due to irrigation, combined with
the swift-maturing sun of Spain. There are, of course, immense
difficulties, and not the least are the ignorance and the poverty of the
peasants. Water added to a poor soil will be of little value if the
peasants are not taught artificial means of enriching the soil, and
modern methods of cultivating it. The extreme poverty of the peasants
would, however, prevent them at present from employing any but the
simplest methods; in many districts they mortgage their land in order to
be able to sow their crops, and Spanish farmers are often in the hands
of the usurers. The usurer has been their only resource in moments of
distress, and finally they are driven to emigrate, leaving their land to
the usurer. A narrow strip of fertile land along the rivers stands out
in contrast to the desolate country beyond. Thus the Ebro flows through
Aragon, among woods of silver birch and poplars, and plantations of
olives and vines and maize; but on either side appears the barren
country of perfectly bare reddish or brown hills of crumbling earth,
like great sand-dunes, without a plant, curiously folded and scored by
rushing water, with intricate, abrupt hollows and catacombs. The
villages are the colour of the soil, and at no great distance are
scarcely distinguishable from a bare hill-side. Or desert plains are
thinly covered with grey thyme, and in the more fertile parts produce
dwarfed vines and corn, so that in autumn one looks across immense,
undivided plains of stubble and yellowing vineyards to the distant
horizon of dim blue hills. The cruel winds[87] of Spain blow straight
from the iced mountain ridges, unstemmed by any barrier of woods. The
first snows fall early round Avila and on the uplands, but in the towns
snow at Christmas is rare. The foreigner sometimes has a capricious wish
to see these wide, tawny plains covered with snow--_après la plaine
blanche une autre plaine blanche_, like the Queen Romayquia, wife of
Abenabet, Moorish King of Seville, who could find no solace in her
longing for the sight of snow. The King ordered almond-trees to be
planted all about the city of Córdoba, that in early spring at least, if
not at Christmas, the Queen might beguile her fancy with the snow-white
almond blossoms.[88] But even in Andalucía, towards the end of December,
one may see several comparatively low mountain ranges thickly coated
with snow. Stores of firing are then brought down to the villages from
the treeless hills. Further north the vines have been pruned, and the
vine-twigs brought in for burning; but here the vines have not yet lost
their leaves, and the firing consists of thyme and whin and rosemary,
mint and lavender and other scented hill-plants. Troops of donkeys
arrive at sunset, with immense, sweet-smelling loads, that entirely hide
the red or purple tassels and fringes of their harness. The oranges now
gleam in myriads along the eastern coast; sometimes the icy winds from
inland freeze them, and fires of smouldering straw are burnt round and
in the orange groves, after the wind has ceased, that a dense smoke may
hang about the trees and warm them. Weeks before Christmas the
_turroneros_ from Jijona, noticeable for their small peaked hats of
black velvet, appear in nearly every city and town of Spain. In porches
or in large bare shops they set out their layers of white wooden boxes,
and samples of the _turrón_, or almond-paste, which is an essential part
of Spanish Christmas fare. For the time, Jijona, the grey town in the
hills, is deserted, though but a few weeks ago every house was a busy
scene of _turrón_ making, and nailing thin white planks into boxes. The
snow will soon lie deep on the Carrasqueta hill-range above the town.
The almond-trees, whose pink flowers in February form a solitary belt of
colour between Jijona and the rocky mountains, are now as bare and grey
as the surrounding country. Some of the inhabitants have gone to the
warmer south, taking the _diligencia_ to Alicante; others have scaled
the steep, winding road past the Barranco de la Batalla, where once the
Cid wrought havoc of the Moors, and now herds of goats feed apparently
on nothing, and have taken train at Alcoy for the cold, high-lying
cities of the north. But not in the northern uplands only are Spanish
winters cruel; the _dehesas_ of Andalucía are equally unprotected, the
silent, icy winds blow subtle and fierce and penetrating over the
undulating hill country round Córdoba, and one may see shepherd boys,
closely muffled in their plaids, standing frozen and motionless, the
sheep pressing around them and against one another for shelter.




IX

THE COAST OF CATALONIA IN AUTUMN


A first view of Catalonia from the sea shows at any rate the stones from
which, according to the proverb, the Catalans make bread. For great
spines of rust-coloured rock, covered here and there by pines of a crude
green, run to the sea and break off in abrupt cliffs. In the valleys of
these ridges towns and villages skirt the shore, Rosas, Palamos, San
Feliú de Guixols with its cork industry, and lace-making Arenys de Mar.
Towards Barcelona both soil and villages become greyer, but Barcelona
itself has colour in plenty. The Spanish and foreign ships in the
harbour, the palm-trees near the quay, above them the tall white and
yellow houses with shutters of green and brown, and above these again a
view of the great Cathedral--all this, bounded by the purple mountains,
makes the sight of Barcelona from the sea very picturesque and
attractive.

The coast to the south of Barcelona is very fertile. There are hedges of
reeds twenty feet high, of cactus and of aloe, aloes of that exquisite
blue-green which is so often the colour of the Mediterranean in
September. Through yellowing orchards of magnificent peaches, of figs
and apples in great abundance, come glimpses of the intense leaden-blue
hill-ranges to the west. The grapes have already for the most part been
gathered for wine, but there are still many vines that, earlier in the
year, are cut back to the ground, and have the look of blighted
potato-plants, and that now, grown to the size of currant-bushes and
unstaked, are laden with large yellow grapes. Occasionally, too, one
sees tall date-palms and orange-trees.

After Casteldefels the hills are covered with pines, and the nights,
which are warm but have heavy dew, bring out their scent so strongly
that it is at times almost oppressive. The nights are silent but for the
continual chirping of crickets and the sound of the unquiet sea. The
stars are strangely bright, Sirius burns large and intense, and Orion
nightly stalks the sky in all his glory till the sun catches him in
mid-heaven. The sea is alive with phosphorus, and far out are seen the
lights of fishing-boats, while on land the glow-worms are almost as many
as the stars. The orange and purple sunrises and sunsets of pink and
amethyst are very lovely, and the sails of the fishing-boats continue
white, and the sea retains its blue for some time after the light of the
after-glow is gone. A little further south the cliffs are covered with
dwarf palms, rosemary in flower, and other shrubs. The road here is
good, but one meets no pedestrians, for a path along the railway is the
accepted thoroughfare between village and village in spite of the
notices that forbid its use. The men for the most part wear a black
peaked cap, a long blouse, and trousers of brown or blue. The sash is
nearly always black and is worn wide, the sandals have a tip and heel
covering only, with fastenings of leather or black cloth from the tip.
The women wear handkerchiefs that entirely cover the head. The
predominant colours are blue and black. A kilomètre or more before
wine-making Sitges the road is bounded by rough terraces of stone with
vines and dark green carob-trees. A succession of terraces on the one
side runs far up the hills, and on the other the rude-walled vineyards
stretch to the edge of the sea. Sitges, a village of less than four
thousand inhabitants, is prettily placed, its octagonal-towered church
rising from a rock in the sea. A few kilomètres further Villanueva y
Geltrú is but a fairly large and rather ordinary provincial town, though
it has its picturesque corners, with its houses washed in various shades
of blue, pink, green, or yellow, and views of vineyard country appearing
at the end of many of its long, straight streets. After Villanueva the
hills recede further inland, and there is a little more flat country,
but it is occupied largely by great marshes, loud with the croaking of
frogs.

It is not till one reaches Roda and Creixell that any villages have a
really Spanish, or rather Castilian, look. Creixell, especially, with
its massive church and great square building of stone standing haughtily
on a hill of wall-terraces sprinkled with carob-trees, and with its
houses the colour of the soil, has all the air of a little Toledo. Early
on an autumn morning it may be seen reflected, with every house and
window, in a blue lagoon hundreds of yards from the village and
separated by sandbanks from the sea. The olives and vineyards now extend
to the shore, and above San Vicente great white country-houses stand
among orchards and olives. After Creixell there are but two villages,
Torredenbarra and Altafulla, before Tarragona, the second coast-town of
Catalonia. Here, indeed, the sun beats with a fiery strength; here,
indeed, the Mediterranean is “crystalline,” and “the lightning of the
noon-tide ocean flashes.” Here is excellent firm sand for bathing and,
swimming far out, the sun is still seen shining through the transparent
water on the waved sand below. At the end of September the season is
over, yet the days are still almost too hot, and the deep blue of the
bay and the long purple line of hills to the north-west are
indescribably beautiful. Tarragona, the favoured city of the Romans, is
the possessor of many noble Roman ruins, and wonderful Cyclopean walls,
and its outline, seen against the sky from the road leading to Tortosa,
is one of the most magnificent in Spain. The town and its neighbourhood,
as well as the whole coast of Catalonia is, perhaps, not as well known
as it deserves. In autumn, if the days and even the nights are hot,
there is always a refreshing coolness in the early mornings; the people
are, as a rule, pleasant and courteous; in some villages many speak
Catalan only, and at times, catching a word here and there, one may
think oneself to be in Italy.




X

AN EASTERN VILLAGE


There is no cloud in the clear March sky, filled with radiant light.
Beyond the dark green of orange-trees and grey olives lies the sea, a
faint line of blue. And, to the west, the mountains of bare rock are
faintly purple, looking frail and brittle in their clear but distant
outlines. A herd of goats passes slowly down a wide river-bed of smooth
white stones, with no shred or vestige of water. Lines of aloes and tall
reeds grow along its banks, and on either side peasants dressed in black
are at work in the fields, ploughing with single mules between the brown
stems of vines recently pruned, or pruning the orange-trees and olives.
Bundles of vine and olive twigs lie ready to be carted to the village
for fuel. Women in dresses of white and pink and scarlet are hoeing the
green corn. The pear- and peach-trees are in flower, and the almond-trees
fully arrayed in freshest green. At intervals, wells or _norias_ explain
the green fresh look of the country, so different from the burnt
desolation of the waterless regions further north. For Oropesa, the
neighbouring village, is but some sixty miles north of Valencia, and is
bordered on the one side by the full fertility of the Valencian plain,
though on the other it is surrounded by barren hills. In each _noria_ a
long crooked branch forms the handle to the iron wheel and to this a
mule is tied, and as the mule turns, the wheel revolves with a slow
clinking sound, and the long earthenware jars (_arcaduces_) attached to
the wheel gush water into a trough and so by small channels of dry earth
into the fields of brown and reddish soil. A path leads through green
fields and clumps of orange-trees to the village. In some fields further
south the last oranges have been gathered, and thousands of pearl-shaped
buds tell that the trees before long will be covered with a glistening
snow of scented blossoms. But in many the oranges still reign
resplendent: on a grey day they stand out with more vivid distinctness
than when the sun blurs them in a luminous haze, leaving them clearly
visible only in the level light of its rising or its setting. The trees
are bowed with fruit, and the laden branches are propped up from the
ground. The thronging oranges glow in myriad spheres of gold, here and
there lie golden mounds of gathered oranges, and below the trees the
ground is a strewn pavement of gold. On every side beneath the trees may
be seen a magic land of myriad golden lamps; single or in trefoils and
clusters of seven and ten and twenty, the oranges hang within a few
inches of the ground. Hundreds of yards away through intervals of trees
appears the same foison of gleaming fruit, and the air is all scented
with oranges. From time to time a light wind blows beneath the trees,
and the twigs with their burdens of crowding oranges sway heavily to and
fro, like slowly swung censers of burning gold. But near Oropesa the
oranges are comparatively few. The village is built on a steep
precipitous hill of grey rock, crowned by the ruinous walls of a great
castle. The houses clamber roof over roof, in ragged disarray up the
rock. They are of yellowish-brown stone with rough cement, and mostly
innocent of glass, but have a touch of whitewash in front, so that they
wear shining morning faces to the rising sun. In the mistless radiant
mornings the village stands out clearly, its sharp rock rising sheer
from the plain. The sea beyond is silver, and on the other side every
wrinkle in the rocks of the grey mountains is distinctly visible. There
is no sound but the occasional voices of children, the clink and clang
of a forge-hammer, the crowing of a cock, or a faint crystal crash of
waves breaking; but from time to time there is a dry rumour of wheels,
and the cry of a man to his mule as he passes down the road in his cart.
Wrapped in their plaids against the keen morning air, the peasants pass
leisurely in carts and on mules to work in the fields until the evening.
At dusk the slow procession returns, with many a greeting and _bona nit_
and smiles of sunburnt wrinkled faces. Thin lines of blue smoke go up
from swiftly flaring fires of vine twigs and rosemary and dry plants
gathered from the hills, and an hour or two hours later Oropesa is
given over to sleep and the silence of the stars, broken only by the
deep rhythmic cry of the _sereno_ calling the hours. To the south a road
goes up through grey rocky hills with thyme and dwarf-palms and cistus.
The bare smooth rocks have a metallic ring, and there is no sign of life
save for a herd of goats far above, the goat-herd with his plaid and
wide felt hat clearly outlined on the sky, and the sound of his flute
distinct in the solitude of the hills, utterly silent save for the
silver tinkling of goat-bells. No water can remain on these rocky hills,
it pours immediately away to the plains beyond, where, by a stream bed
barely a yard wide, a pillar tells of those who perished there in 1850,
in “the _diligencia_ carried away by the waters of the torrent.” Though
Oropesa now has a railway station, the _diligencias_ still ply between
it and Castellón and Torreblanca, and it might be fifty miles from any
railway, so primitive and self-centred is its life. Occasionally comes a
sunless morning with a quiet grey sky, rare on the east coast of Spain
except in the days of early spring. The sea lies motionless and grey,
with pale reflections of light in coils and patches of gold. So still is
the air that the quiet piping of birds among the olives falls like a
stone in hushed waters. As the day advances the mountains, which earlier
were mingled and lost in the grey of the sky, grow more distinct, till
towards sunset every line and crevice in their sharp ranges becomes
marked, and the overhanging mist of cloud melts away into the grey of
evening, sprinkled with the gold-dust of the stars.




XI

OFF THE EAST COAST OF SPAIN


The Mediterranean off the coast of Spain is not always calm. Sometimes
the east wind, the _Llevant_, lashes the waves to fury, and the shores
along the villages and towns are black with lines of fishing-boats that
dare not put out to sea. But for weeks together it is “lulled in the
coil of its crystalline streams,” and the sun rises and sets across a
silken plain of blue. In such weather a journey along the coast has a
wonderful freshness and a fascinating charm. Again and again the
traveller recalls the magic of those lines of the old romance:

    “Quién hubiese tal ventura,
     Sobre las aguas del mar,
     Como hubo el conde Arnaldos,
     La mañana de San Juan!”

    “Oh for a chance as happy,
     Where the deep sea waters swell,
     As on the morn of St. John’s Day,
     Count Arnaldos befel,” etc.

By St. John’s Day, however, the sun flashes its rays too fiercely, and
it is in late spring or early autumn that the voyage is most enjoyable.
A land journey can give no idea of the loveliness of these coasts, and
towns such as Alicante and Almería lose much of their beauty if deprived
of their background of mountains, which can only be seen fully out at
sea. The sea and sky are unfailingly beautiful, and the life of the
ports, full of colour and movement, never loses its interest. Almería,
fallen from its ancient greatness, is yet active in its “purple-shadowed
bay,”[89] and exports every year two million barrels, a hundred million
pounds, of grapes, chiefly to America and England. Torrevieja, further
north, is a small town or village of some seven thousand inhabitants, at
which steamers touch to take in a cargo of salt, but which the tourist,
on his way from Elche to Murcia, rarely turns aside to visit. It has a
thoroughly African look, with its flat-roofed, grey-white houses on a
bare, level strip of sandy coast, with no trees except palms, that stand
conspicuous like trees of the desert; the sand in places is thinly
covered with grass, of lightest, almost yellow, green. To the left, seen
from the sea, is a long line of gleaming salt, drawn from the sea-water
by evaporation under the summer sun, and now ready to be exported.
Beyond the line of salt is a distant range of bare mountains, faintly
purple. The town has one or two small towers, four factory chimneys, and
half a dozen round mills, with arms as slender as the cranes on the
loading steamers in the harbour. A continual rosary of barges, yellow,
white, green, or black, carries the salt across the bay. The heavy load
weighs the barge to the water’s edge, and the glistening white salt
seems to float on the blue surface. In the barge, at either end, go as
many as twenty or even thirty men, some sitting rowing, others facing
them and standing to row, and others punting with their poles of immense
length that taper away at the top to the slight girth of a fishing rod.
The shirts of the men, mauve, pink, white, red, or purple, their light
blue or black coats, red sashes, trousers of velvet or velvet corduroy
of many shades, from bright yellow to dark brown, the long shining
yellow punt poles, and the white pyramids of salt on the sea of
sapphire, combine to form a strange and beautiful sight. The empty
barges return high in the water, with little mounds of salt left along
their ledges. At midday the houses seem to faint and grow indistinct,
the mountains fade to a hardly perceptible outline, only the salt
reflects the sun in every facet of its countless grains, and glitters
whiter than snow. In the sunset the lines resume their sharpness, and
the mountains are grey or blue-grey or intense leaden blue or purple,
according to their distances. The Murcian sky is famous for its clear
serenity, and the sunsets and sunrises are of surpassing fairness.
Alicante, too, which is nearer to Murcia than to Valencia, has a
wonderful sky and a wonderful sea, and here, too, the “sunrise is a
glorious birth.” “Alicante aux clochers mêle les minarets,” says Victor
Hugo in one of the poems of “Les Orientales,” and from the sea Alicante
has an Oriental look, with its lines of palms, stories of flat roofs,
and bare background of hills and mountains. But it is at evening that
Alicante is one of the most beautiful cities in the world. The lights
shine softly through the four lines of palm-trees along the Paseo de los
Mártires, and are reflected across the water; in the harbour the last
radiance of evening sets the tracery of masts and cranes and rigging in
clear relief. To the west the sea is already dark, almost wine-coloured,
the οἲνψ of the Greeks, but in the east it is a most
exquisite blue, a blue that seems to be a transparent surface of
turquoise covering a layer of white chalk. The eastern horizon is
faintly purple, and against it the sails of a fleet of fishing-boats are
whiter than at any other time, and gleam long after the sun has set.
Later the sea catches for an instant the faint purple of the sky, the
sky loses its colour, and finally a mistiness of softest grey merges
them together, so that one may no longer distinguish where the sky
ceases or the sea begins. On the rocks of the coast the waves at night
break, filled with phosphorus, in a luminous spray, “like light
dissolved in star showers thrown.” The low line of pale lights along El
Grao, Valencia’s harbour, if approached at night, has a look, from some
distance at sea, of such a phosphorus wave. By day the harbour is seen
to be a forest of masts, and far away the towers of Valencia, round the
tall Miguelete, appear as numerous, and in the distance almost as
slender as the masts of the harbour: “les clochers de ses trois cents
églises.” Along the coast of the Huerta, especially to the south of
Valencia, glisten a number of snow-white pyramids, that seem at first to
be more salt, having the exact look of the mounds that lie along the bay
of Cadiz. They are the whitewashed, triangular fronts of the peasants’
thatched cottages or _barracas_, standing in the fertile plain, “Spain’s
Orchard.”

One of the most lovely and original sights along the whole coast is that
of the high range of bare, treeless mountains south of Cartagena,
falling sheer into the sea, a delicate purple above the light blue
water. There is not the merest rim of coast, in fact the sea flows round
the mountains’ flanks, and they continue far out from the land, their
tops occasionally appearing as small islands.

But especially will the traveller who has the happy chance to find
himself at dawn of a cloudless day in a boat an hour west of
Almería--especially then will he be ready to repeat the lines:

    “Quién hubiese tal ventura
     Sobre las aguas del mar.”

A slight gleam in the east warns the moon that its reign of quiet light
is to finish, and begins the long prelude of day. Above a dark line of
sea a faint orange creeps into the sky, deepening to orange-purple, and
soon fringing off in pale yellow, saffron, and daffodil. Then, later,
above this, widens a space of clearest green, and at last the body of
the sky changes from grey to a light blue. In the west all is still
grey, as with a soft woof of hanging mists. The sails of a boat going
out to sea are white in the first glow of dawn, and the gently swelling
sea eastwards reflects the light in level gleams of gold, like smooth,
burnished meadows of buttercups. Then the sun rises, red-orange, on a
cloudless sea line, the sea becomes light blue, and along the rest of
the horizon lie spaces of pearl and opal, while in the east a dim,
silver moon fades slowly. The scene is of such enchanting loveliness,
like the birth of a new world, that if the Sierra Nevada chances to be
for the most part hidden in a long cloud of mist, the traveller scarcely
notices one or two peaks that seem to be floating snow-white clouds.
Then the mist of cloud melts away, and, one by one, the snow summits
appear, till the whole immense range stands bare, looking incredibly
high in a heaven of clear, faint green. It is a sight to make men hold
their breath. The ship, night’s shadows scarce driven from her deck,
passes slowly, almost noiselessly through the water as if she, too,
understood that here is some enchanted country. The view of the Sierra
Nevada from Granada, lovely as it is, gives no hint of a sight so
incomparable as this. The range is of such vast length, the snow is so
deep and soft. Long, almost level lines, huge, abrupt crags, gently
sloping gullies, smooth, pyramid-shaped peaks, shelves and pinnacles,
crevices and ledges, are all entirely wrapped in deep, much-sunned snow,
without a break. Each look, after turning for a moment to the grey
western horizon or the waving, crystalline surface of blue sea, brings a
new wonder and a fresh surprise; so marvellous is the radiance of white
appearing in the full glow from the east, and such is the infinite
clearness and subtlety of the outlines on a sky varying from blue-grey
to transparent green. The long massive range, seen from some distance
out at sea, gives the impression of a height of twenty thousand feet,
whereas from Granada it is difficult to realize that the highest peak is
over eleven thousand. Below the snow-line, a high range of bare
grey-purple mountains seems to sink into the sea, though there is, in
fact, a line of level coast. Far or near no tree is to be seen; a white
lighthouse stands on the coast, and on the silken blue sea gleams an
occasional white sail or the flash of a seagull’s wing. As the sun rises
higher the softly folding mountains beneath the Sierra Nevada grow more
purple above the sea, and the shadows of their dimpling hollows blacken.
Above, the wide, smooth spaces and the deep ravines present their broad
surplice of glistening white to the sun without a shadow. It is all
unimaginably lovely, with a breathless purity of things primeval--

    “Die unbegreiflich hohen Werke
     Sind herrlich wie am ersten Tag.”

This and other hours of delight during a coasting voyage in the Spanish
Mediterranean are not soon forgotten, and, though they cannot be
translated into words--

    “They flash upon that inward eye
     Which is the bliss of solitude.”

The voyage may be prolonged on the south coast, and, from the time
when, on his left, Tarifa lies along the sea, like a line of melting
snow under smoothly moulded hills of green, and, on the right, Tangiers
shows its white houses indistinctly beneath the bare, grey mountains of
Africa, to the time when at Port Bou he bids farewell to the Catalan
coast and to Spain, the traveller will not have a dull or unenjoyable
moment; if only the gods send him propitious, cloudless days--

    “Quién hubiese tal ventura
     Sobre las aguas del mar!”




XII

THE JUDGING OF THE WATERS


It was a cloudless day of November. The Cathedral of Valencia stood grey
against a sky of soft blue. In the _Plaza de la Constitución_ the sun
shone on the central fountain and marked in dark lines the shadows of
the houses and the Cathedral. From the great “Door of the Apostles” came
a smell of incense as people went out and in. Surmounted by its large
rose-window, the doorway has a worn and ancient air, and the plants
growing here and there in the wall add to its look of venerable
splendour. Some of the apostles stand there headless, some without arms,
some mere trunks of stone. Above, the tall _Miguelete_ tower rises
conspicuous here, as it is conspicuous far and wide across the Valencian
plain. A few priests passed, a few carts drawn by long strings of mules,
a newspaper-seller cried the _Heraldo de Madrid_, and some peasants in
black or blue-grey groups talked together, leaning on their sticks.
Shortly after eleven a long, green sofa was set up on the pavement
immediately in front of the Cathedral door, and a narrow space round it
was enclosed with an iron railing. Sofa and railing, carried across the
street in sections, bore the inscription _Tribunal de las Aguas_. For it
was Thursday, the meeting-day of the tribunal which judges disputes
arising from the irrigation of the Huerta.

To the peasant of the Valencian Huerta loss of water for his land means
starvation, and the hours at which each is allowed to draw off water
from the narrow channels that cross his land are carefully regulated. If
one takes water out of his turn the fields of another must suffer, and
the case must be brought before the judges sitting in weekly council.
Against their sentence there is no protest or appeal; it is absolutely
final, and though there must be cases of injustice, the peasants are
very proud of their tribunal. There is no writing--the cases are not
even recorded--the matter is decided on the spot and in the open air
between man and man; there are no clerks or advocates; no table, ink, or
papers to confuse the simple;[90] no fees or anxious delays, and the
judges, moreover, chosen by and from the peasants themselves, thoroughly
understand the questions brought before them. It is a strange sight, the
sitting of this all-powerful institution, centuries old, in the _Plaza
de la Constitución_, in the twentieth century. There is a dignified
simplicity about it, a lack of display which is imposing. The peasants
have a conscious pride in being able to arrange their own affairs
without interference of the men of learning, just as they are ready to
settle their more private quarrels without recourse to the law. The man
who has been stabbed in a quarrel will conceal the name of his assailant
from the police, always reserving for himself the pleasure of taking
vengeance later on. The character of the peasants of the Huerta is
indeed a mixture of haughtiness and cunning, of simplicity and
shrewdness, and the word that best describes them is the Spanish
_socarronería_--a certain malicious humour.[91] Living isolated in the
vast open plain, they form a community apart, and resent external
interference. Their tribunal is entirely primitive and rustic; in all
its years of city life it has adopted none of the city’s ways, and has
not even the shelter of a roof.

In the present instance there was but a single question to be settled,
and the proceedings lasted less than five minutes, passing all but
unnoticed. At about a quarter to twelve the judges, five in number, and
dressed in black as ordinary peasants, walked slowly into the enclosure
and occupied their places on the official sofa, taking off their black
felt hats. The full body of the judges is seven, chosen from different
districts to represent the principal canals of irrigation. Another
peasant, officer of the tribunal (on his cap is written _A. de T.
Aguas_, the _alguacil_, that is, of the Tribunal of Waters), standing at
the small gate in the railing, formally declared the tribunal open:
_S’obri el tribunal_ are the consecrated words. He then introduced the
plaintiff and defendant, who stood bareheaded and without their sticks
at half a yard’s distance from the judges. After each had stated his
case--and any interruption is rigorously fined--one of the judges at
once passed sentence. The verdict was against the old man, and he turned
without a word to leave the enclosure. His wife, however, without the
railing, though he put his finger to his lips to silence her, was not to
be overawed, and in a shrill torrent of words reproached the judges as
they filed solemnly into the Plaza. The _Tribunal de las Aguas_ was
closed; the judges dispersed to their silent fields, to meet again in
the rattle and clamour of the crowded city on the following Thursday.
Every Thursday throughout the year the plain green sofa and circular
railing are brought out in sections, and the judges make their
appearance in the Plaza. They do not always enter the enclosure, for
sometimes there is no dispute pending, or the disputants have come to an
agreement in the Plaza without recourse to the tribunal, and when the
clock strikes twelve, railing and sofa are carried back. The judges help
to bring about a settlement, and this perhaps explains that their
official verdicts are given instantaneously, with no pause for thought
or consultation; they have no doubt heard every detail of the case and
come to a decision beforehand.

Readers of Don Vicente Blasco Ibáñez’ gloomy but delightful novel, “La
Barraca,” will remember the scene at the “Door of the Apostles” when
Batiste, unable to check his indignation at the unjust charge brought
against him, is fined for his excited interruptions and fined too for
the misdeed which he had not committed. But as a rule the scene is a
quiet and almost a solemn one. The tribunal has the sanctity of years;
the peasant respects an institution which was the same in his father’s
time and in his grandfather’s, and in that of his ancestors five
centuries ago. The judges who before and after are simple peasants, are,
for the moment invested with the power of settling matters of vital
importance; for disregarding the sentence of the tribunal they may
deprive a man entirely of his right of water, and so render him and his
family penniless. They represent the whole Huerta, embodying alike its
independent spirit and its conservative traditions. A few minutes after
the judges have risen, and sometimes before the Cathedral clock has
struck twelve, sofa and railing have disappeared, and it is hard to
realize that the time-honoured Judging of the Waters, so primitive and
impressive, has actually been held in this city of two hundred thousand
inhabitants, and in this paved square where now there are but few
wayfarers, and the central fountain flows and trickles in silence.




XIII

SEVILLE IN WINTER


It is in spring, from March to May, that Seville is chiefly visited; the
warm air and hot sun, the orange-trees in flower, the great religious
festivals, the famous bull-fights, attract a host of foreigners, and the
city has an animation unwonted even in the gay and lively capital of
Andalucía. In winter Seville has a quieter, but perhaps not less potent
charm. Winter often brings with it a succession of cool clear days, when
the sky is of a serene, almost transparent blue, with golden sunsets.
The white lines of flat-roofed houses seen against the blue of the
evening sky have the soft light and colouring of opals, while the
distant hills of the horizon are faintly purple. On these still days the
motionless river reflects the lines of leafless silver birch and yellow
tamarisks in all the tracery of their slender branches. A few yards
further from the bank on either side thousands of dark orange-trees are
hung with gleaming fruit, circling the city with a fringe of lamps.
Above and through the trees, now bare and grey, of the _Paseo de las
Delicias_ show the various greens of the tall eucalyptus-trees and
palms, the orange-trees and cypresses of the Santelmo gardens. On the
quay lie immense mounds of oranges ready to be packed: the hot sun fills
the air with their scent, children make flying attacks and retire
precipitately with an orange apiece, while an occasional beggar also
receives his dole from the apparently inexhaustible store. In the
ever-crowded _Calle de las Sierpes_ small open stalls display fresh
violets and magnificent carnations and roses, and in some gardens one
may see roses and geraniums in flower. In the lovely gardens of the
Alcázar the sun draws a deliciously mingled scent from the box-hedges,
myrtles and oranges.

Occasionally--still in unclouded weather--the wind is cold and piercing
and all go muffled to the eyes, the men in their _capas_, the women with
long shawls. In the _Patio de los Naranjos_, beneath the trees laden
with oranges, the wind sweeps across the pavement of rough bricks,
intergrown with grass and the duller green of mosses, and rattles the
fallen leaves in lines and circles. Far above, the great Giralda tower
stands pink and creamy grey in the clear winter sky. By the Gate of
Pardon, in a corner of hot sun and sheltered from the wind, a few
beggars sit warming themselves and watching with Oriental patience and
immobility. The streets are mostly too narrow to let in the sun, but in
the _plazas_ and any open space men are seen basking in sunshine,
_tomando el sol_. Along the bridge that leads to the suburb of Triana
the seats on both sides are crowded. Triana, better than Seville,
corresponds to Cervantes’ description of a city where adventures are to
be met at every street corner, and Triana supplies an army of loiterers
whose life’s mission in winter is to “take the sun.”

On the eve of high festivals in winter, such as the Epiphany, it is
already growing dark when services are held, and the vast Cathedral is
faintly lit with hundreds of candles and dim hanging lamps, though the
last daylight still lingers awhile in the deep reds and purples, green,
orange, and every colour of the windows overhead. There is no procession
of the Three Kings through the city; at Alcoy, in the province of
Valencia, the Three Kings come riding, laden with presents, into the
town from beyond the grey mountains that surround it, and half the
population goes out to meet them, but Seville is too “civilized” for
this.

Even in Seville not all the winter days are cloudless and serene. On
some of them the sky is a uniform grey, and the rain falls unceasingly
till the centre of the narrower, unevenly cobbled streets, raised at
either side and without a pavement, becomes a running stream. But when
the Andalusian sun reappears, the houses have an added freshness in
their glowing white, or in their coats of faint green or red, yellow or
purple (though even these usually have a line of white along the roof),
and in the air is a feeling of spring. There is an ancient Andalusian
song that makes March say to January--

    “Con tres días que me quedan
     Y tres que me preste mi compadre Abríl
     He de poner tus ovejas
     Que te acordarás de mí.”

(With the three days that are left me and three lent me by my friend
April, I will put your sheep in such a plight that you will remember
me.) This is the Cumbrian:--

    “March said to Aperill
     ‘I see three haggs [sheep] upon a hill.
     And if you will lend me dayes three
     I’ll find a way to make them dee.’”

But the rigour of the days that follow in Cumberland has no place or
parallel in the low-lying districts of Andalucía:--

    “The first of them was wind and weet,
     The second of them was snaw and sleet,
     The third of them was sic a freeze
     It froze the birds’ nebs to the trees;
     When the three days were past and gane
     The three silly haggs came hirpling hame.”

At Seville a few weeks after the Day of the Kings winter is really over:
in February the sky has an intenser blue, and with the longer sunshine
the warmth increases. The spring days follow in their matchless
splendour, till finally the sun’s fiery heat drives all who can leave
the city to the cooler refuge of the sea or the hills.




XIV

FROM A SEVILLE HOUSETOP


In winter Seville’s sky is sometimes for weeks entirely cloudless. Day
after day opens and dies peacefully away like a perfect flower; or, if a
strong cold wind drives across the day, it still blows in a heaven of
limitless clear blue. But in early spring the sky is often veiled in a
floating canopy of grey, or one may watch the white masses of clouds
thin and melt on the blue. And the blue is no longer fixed, distant, and
serene; even when apparently clear it has a vague movement of dissolving
mists, an intangible white softness interlacing it. It is this quality
of the sky, harmonizing so well with the soft lines and delicate colours
of the city, that gives to Seville in spring its unfailing charm.
Especially is that charm felt in the hour when men’s cigarettes begin to
glow and dot the streets with tiny fire-flies, distinct as the white
flowers worn by the women in their hair. The deep-red carnations and
dark violets of the open flower-stalls fade into shadow; the light
greens, lilacs, yellows, browns, and blues of the houses take a greyer
tinge. The last sunshine throws its thinner radiance along the white
lines of flat roofs that stand out in many levels and angles on the blue
or blue-and-white sky, and the effect is of pearls and opals, not the
flash of polished opals, but, as it were, blue veins of opal in white
chalk. The west is filled with a level radiance of pure gold, and
presently the eastern sky also changes from blue to a faint golden grey.
One by one the hanging street lamps begin to shed their soft glow of
white light, and overhead the first stars shine faintly and vanish and
reappear. The bells of goats and the mellower note of cowbells are heard
as they go their evening round to be milked, driven by a boy astride his
donkey, or by an old man with faded-pink umbrella; or a donkey passes
laden with oranges, the fruit’s gold gleaming through the twilight
afterglow from between the netting of the panniers. A breath of country
air invades the city; the day’s work is ended, and perhaps from some
church or convent you may hear “a distant bell that seems to mourn the
dying of the day”:

                  “Squilla di lontano
    Che paia ’l giorno pianger che si muore.”

The swift Southern twilight soon dies, but this short hour more than any
other embodies the magic of a Seville spring. For Seville at other times
is “a city full of stirs, a tumultuous city, a joyous city.” It wakes to
a discordant music of many street cries. All kinds of wares are hawked
shrilly, with loud shouts, or slow, dirge-like chants. Later in the day
come the more melodious cries of “Oranges! Water! Violets!
Carnations!--_¡Qué buenas naranjas! Agua, quien quiere agua! Violetas!
Claveles!_” But to the flat brick-paved housetops, surrounded with walls
of different height, from three to twenty feet, all whitewashed to their
level tops, these sounds of the street come faintly. The rattle of
wheels over the cobbles is deadened, the bells of slowly driven cows and
goats chime distantly; sometimes one hears the intricate whistle of the
knife-grinder, or a barrel-organ plays an interminable dance to the
clacking of castañets, that fascinates by its ceaseless repetition. But
the sounds are vague and muffled, without harshness or stridency, and
here reigns more uninterrupted quiet than in the cool marble _patios_
below, with the frequent goings out and in through the door’s iron
_reja_. On the walls or in the line of shade beneath them stand rows of
plants--roses, geraniums, heliotrope, and especially carnations. From
here the street sellers fill their open stalls and baskets with the huge
carnations of spring, the smaller early carnations coming chiefly from
Málaga. And the carnations never look more beautiful than seen, dark red
or pink or yellow, against these walls of glistening white; one is fain
to call them by their German or “soft Spanish name”--_Nelken, claveles_.
The sun rising lights up the housetops so that they gleam like snow
between the dark spaces of bronze or green or blue glazed tiles,
slender-springing towers, and infrequent roofs, covered thickly in
spring with grass, like small fields. Or on a night of moon the city has
a phantom look of whited sepulchres, and if no moon looks round her
with delight when the heavens are bare, there is an uninterrupted view
of stars in the whole sky, as from a ship’s deck. At midday, when the
sun is all fire and narrows the lines of shadow to mere rims of black,
one may not look for more than an instant across the glaring radiance of
white. In the morning there is an exquisite freshness. Little smoke
rises from the houses--only an occasional tiny wraith of grey--but,
beyond, a dense line goes up from the Cartuja factory of _azulejos_, and
hangs black-purple on the blue sky--the morning sky streaked with waving
outdrawn wisps of white mist-like cloud. There is a flapping of pigeons’
wings as they flutter from wall to wall, and the twittering of
innumerable sparrows. The hours are marked by the crystal striking of
many clocks that are heard only dim and intermittently from below in the
street traffic. But it is at evening that the housetop has an almost
magical charm, when the sun has set in a sky of delicate gold, and in
the east long thin lines of white and faint purple cloud lie across a
sky of lightest blue. Then the flowers along the wall give out all their
scent. Swallows whirl and swerve far overhead or lightly skim the
hundred levels of whitewashed turret and wall. The _claveles_ fade
slowly in the growing dusk; the wide, uneven plain of glowing walls
gradually becomes indistinct and blurred; finally the sky, too, is
moulded to a perfect symmetry of grey, and perhaps an immense
orange-coloured moon climbs slowly above the city. Seville is lovely in
winter, when the sky is a cold, serene blue, and night by night the
stars glint and glitter; lovely in spring, when everywhere, in roof and
_patio_ and garden, is a triumph of green, when the oranges still hang
on the orange-trees in flower--like yellow crocuses peering from the
snow--and the corn is already high in the olives beyond the river;
lovely in summer, when the greens are parched and shrivelled, and a hot
wind blows heavily across the fainting housetops, or in nights of sultry
stillness the intense glow from many a lighted _patio_ falls across the
velvet darkness of the narrow streets. Lovely at all times, but never
more lovely than in the temperate days of spring, when a hundred bells
are ringing for the Feast of Resurrection, and the flowers from
countless roofs are gathered for the _fête_; when, in scenes of fairy
magic, the slow _pasos_ move with their myriad candles burning through
the twilight, along the crowded streets and _plazas_ to the Cathedral,
while still peacefully above its Court of Oranges the tall Giralda looks
across the city that hems it in, to the wide _dehesas_ of Andalucía, to
the green fields and olive-covered hills beyond the gently flowing
Guadalquivir, and to the distant line of the Sierra Morena.




XV

FEBRUARY IN ANDALUCÍA


Not one perhaps in a hundred of those who visit Seville and Granada sees
more than a glimpse of the beautiful country and curious villages of
Andalucía; yet there is much pleasure and interest to be had from a
journey through all this region. In February an early start with the sun
will enable the traveller on horseback or on foot to accomplish a fair
day’s journey, since the sun has not yet begun to burn and force him to
rest for some six central hours of the day, as later in the year. And
the outlines on every side are exquisitely clear, the sky usually
cloudless, and streams flow where later there will be but dry channels.
In parts the fields and roadside spaces are blue and purple with
dwarf-irises (the peasants call them simply _lirios_, lilies), and the
almond-trees are in flower; and at no time of the year is there a
greater and more delightful contrast between spring in the valley and
winter on the hills. Near Seville the immense plains stretch
interminably to the faint mountains, brown and dull-green pastures of
heather and dwarf-palm, flecked with silver-white streaks of water;
herds of cattle, glossy black with white horns, pigs, horses, and great
flocks of sheep graze there. Or the country is gently undulating like
Sussex downs, but with softlier-moulded outlines and a horizon of faint
blue mountains, in February exquisitely distinct in faintness. A village
often entirely covers one of the small hills, not a house venturing
forward to form an outskirt, but all clustered and compact. Steep,
perfectly straight streets of sharp narrow cobbles, without side
pavements, run up to the church at the top through rows of low,
whitewashed houses, of a single storey and of a dazzling whiteness. At
evening the labourers come in from the far distant fields in a
continuous line, on foot or on mules and donkeys, and children go out to
meet them and are given a ride back into the village. Sometimes their
return is of several kilomètres, over deep earthy or stony paths, and,
with their gleaming mattocks (_pioches_, _azadones_) over their
shoulders, they are now to be seen clearly outlined on the evening sky,
and now are lost from view in one of the many hollows of the hills. Far
and near there is no tree, “neither bush nor shrub to bear off any
weather at all,” and the winds seem to have sifted and moulded the hills
into softly folding mounds and hollows. In February the winds still blow
occasionally with icy breath, and you will meet men on crimson and
magenta-tasselled mules and donkeys, closely wrapped in old-fashioned
_capas_ of brown, only their eyes visible. On the road there are few
travellers--charcoal-burners coming down with troops of laden donkeys
from the hills, or a slow cart drawn by a string of mules, the driver
lazily asleep, and the reins appearing from between the soles of his
sandals,[92] or a troop of gipsies, or orange sellers with the panniers
of their mules brimmed with oranges, now selling at six _reales_, a
little over a shilling, the hundred. Sometimes the country is all
grey-pinched and icy, and but a little further (as near snow-white Arcos
de la Frontera) are great hedges of shrubs and aloes and brambles and
cactus, with a sound of bees, and hovering white and yellow butterflies,
and wide spaces of tall branched flowers of asphodel and grey scented
rosemary. Or in a corner of windswept hills you may find a sheltered
_huerta_ with thick hedge of tall black cypresses; the oranges crowd the
trees with gold, and the almond-trees shed across the dusty road a thick
carpet of broken flowers, pink and white. To Grazalema leads only a
steep and narrow foot-path after one has left the road not far from
Algodonales (pronounced by the peasants in a torrent of vowels Aooae)
and crossed the river Guadalete. In the valley the oranges gleam in
myriads, and the hills immediately above are coloured with a continuous
spray of almond-trees in flower, entirely covering their sides, and
sometimes crowning them in triumph. And far above, over woods of cork
and evergreen oak from which rise frail blue lines of smoke from
charcoal-burners’ fires, appear two or three peaks of snow clear against
a pale blue sky. The path goes up along hedges of brambles through
asphodels and hundreds of trailing periwinkles, with stepping-stones and
flowing streams; here and there a snow-white olive-oil mill with
sentinel cypresses. And, below, the pale snow-fed Guadalete flows
swiftly over white stones through groves of oranges. From a distance
Grazalema gives the fanciful idea of broken shells on a stony shore,
with its houses of white and pink and brown, many of them overhanging
and seeming to grow out of steep rocks. From the village a path leads
through corkwoods, the stripped trunks of the trees a deep maroon
colour, to Ronda on its sheer hill. From Antequera to Málaga by road is
some fifty kilomètres, and here, too, are wonderful contrasts and sudden
change from winter to summer. In the unsheltered plains round Bobadilla
the almond-trees show no sign of flower, and the grey mountains above
the stern frowning towers of Antequera are ice-bound. Turning the pass,
appears a magnificent view of six or seven serrated hill-ranges to the
line of sea beyond hidden Málaga--on the left a fantastically jagged
range, sprinkled in parts with snow; on the right a long line of
snow-mountains that ends in a bare range rising purple from the sea. And
the ice soon grows thin and vanishes, giving place to irises, tiny
jonquils, and periwinkles, and descending half-way down the mountain
side, to Villanueva, the almond-trees have already lost half their
blossoms, grass and white dusty road and dark new-ploughed soil are
thickly strewn with their petals, and the fields of broad beans are in
scented black and white flower. Along the coast full summer reigns, the
balconies are heavy with trailing flowers, the sea is deepest blue, and
the wind blows half-sultrily across the fields of beans and the
faded-green leaves of sugar-cane, with their scent of hay. Sometimes the
road is lined with poplars, and ox-carts go laden with grass and trefoil
and leaves from the sugar-canes. Elsewhere the road winds inland through
grey rocky hills and woods of strong-scented pines, with glimpses of
blue sea; or passes high above cliffs, the sea swelling dull green
immediately below or foaming round dark rocks. From Motril or some other
point one may go up to Granada, the Sierra Nevada appearing and altering
continually; and thoughts of the Alhambra and other names of magic
shorten the road, though it has many a beautiful view and village, such
as Pino to the left on the mountain side, with its white houses and deep
red-brown roofs. But of the many fair districts of Andalucía perhaps the
most delightful in scenery is that lying between the Guadalquivir and La
Mancha, a region of brushwood and mountain. The road from Marmolejo runs
up through hills covered with shrubs of every shade of green, from
grey-blue to shrill yellow, many of them scented, lentiscus, escalonia,
_adelfa_, cistus, rosemary, and a hundred more; even in February the
mid-day sun scents the whole air with them. Near the village of
Cardeña, some thirty miles from Marmolejo, a ruin is supposed to be that
of the inn where many scenes of “Don Quixote” occurred, but only a few
stones remain. Leaving the village in early morning in frost and ice in
order to go down to Montoro on the Guadalquivir, the road at first is
wild, bordered by oak-trees, with flocks of sheep, a few patches of
corn, many magpies, the plaining of birds and the occasional whirr of a
partridge. Yet even here in a few hollows are vines and almond-trees,
and spaces of scented plants and wild yellow jonquils, with white or
brown or yellow butterflies, a humming of bees and rustling of lizards.
The road now cuts through hills of scented shrubs, so various and
ordered with such careful harmony as could be rivalled by no garden
planted by man. On either side are range and range of hills
shrub-covered, dull green, brown and blue, brown where the shrubs have
been cut for firing. To the right is a wide deep gorge with tiny river
far below, and glimpses of blue distances and valleys of more hills. To
the left more hills, and across a blue distance of hill valleys the
Sierra de Jaen with its beautiful pyramid-shaped peak of deepest snow,
and far to the right of it the two more pointed peaks of Granada’s
Sierra Nevada, marvellously clear in distance. Between them and the
Sierra de Jaen runs the snow-sprinkled range above the village of Los
Villares de Jaen. In the transparent might of even a February noon the
more distant and the higher of the near hills are purple, and the great
snow-mountains below the snow-line grow faint and grey. Montoro is a
beautiful quaint town rising above the Guadalquivir in seven or eight
storeys of houses of red stone and whitewash. The tall church-tower,
also of red stone, stands massively above the town, and precipitously
steep and cobbled streets lead up to it. Houses look sheer down from
windows, balconies, and gardens to the river far below, which flows over
a weir above and below the town, so that there is a perpetual sound of
rushing water. From Montoro one may follow the Guadalquivir, now a
majestic river, through its olive groves to the famous bridge of
Alcolea, and the low white line beneath bare hills and wooded mountains
which is Córdoba, seen from the East. Everywhere on the roads and in the
inns of Andalucía the peasants are courteous, pleasant, intelligent,
picturesque; always ready to give any service in their power, often
immensely ignorant. They will ask if “Ingalaterra” is not Spain’s
border-country and confuse it with Gibraltar, or if the Queen was a
Christian before her marriage. For the most part they cannot read or
write;[93] yet they converse willingly on the most various subjects,
especially on politics and religion, the mayor and the priest. Here a
woman complains: “Nine children I had, and the nine are dead; it’s
better so in these times of misery”; there a peasant describes the snowy
Sierra in the month of August, how it glows whiter than lilies across
the plain--_más blanca, que una azucena_; or tells how beautiful is the
country in later spring when the quinces, apples, and pomegranates are
in flower, _que es un paraiso_--a very paradise. As they sit round the
_candela_, in the cold evenings of early spring, talk flows on into the
night, always pleasant and courteous, as of one _gran señor_ to
another.




XVI

SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF SPANISH LITERATURE


There is not a literature in Europe more individual than that of Spain.
It has been influenced greatly at various times by other countries,
especially Italy and France, but in its many masterpieces it has a
flavour of the soil, a local colouring that is all its own. Even when
Spanish authors have borrowed most freely they have usually succeeded in
casting their own individuality over their “honourable kind of
thieving.” Who has a more individual genius than Juan Ruiz, the merry
Archpriest of Hita? Yet it has been shown that his debt to French,
Latin, and other authors is very considerable. In this form of
borrowing--practised by Shakespeare--which is not a direct imitation but
a loan of bricks to make them marble, there is in fact a high
originality. The phrase in which the merits of the Marqués de Santillana
have been summed up might be applied to the whole of Spanish literature:
when it ceases to imitate it is inimitable. Santillana’s mountain
songs--his _serranillas_ are scented as it were with the thyme of the
Castilian hills, whereas his sonnets in the Italian manner are
colourless and artificial.

Mr. Fitzmaurice-Kelly speaks of “that forcible realistic touch, that
alert vision, that intense impression of the thing seen and accurately
observed which give to Spanish literature its peculiar stamp of
authenticity.” The clear atmosphere of Spain, in which distant mountains
seem to be close at hand, is also the atmosphere of Spanish literature.
The Spaniard may have little subtlety of insight or critical judgment,
but he has a directness of vision that has manifested itself in bigotry,
brutality, and cynical satire, as well as in keen humour,
straight-forwardness, and dignity of character. The realism which has
produced the terrible Christs of the Cathedrals, with their long human
hair and life-like wounds, or the polychrome statues of Spanish carvers,
with a presentation of pain on the human face in all and more than all
its horror--this realism may be due either to a hatred of all that is
false and factitious or to a lack of sensibility, an inability to
sympathize without a harsh shock, a thrill of terrified awe. What would
the Greeks have said to these tortured features, these agonizing brows
and flowing wounds? It is as false art to perpetuate in wood or stone
the agony of a few culminating moments as it is to picture a face
laughing or yawning, from whose perpetually open mouth we will soon turn
with a laugh or a yawn. This realism has found a less harsh expression
in Spanish literature, as in the sane and brilliant art of Velázquez.
The brutality occasionally makes itself felt, as in some of Quevedo’s
bitter writings, but most often the spirit is nobler and more human. In
the twelfth-century “Poema del Cid” all the figures stand out in
wonderful clearness, from the Cid himself to the nine years’ old child
at Burgos, who tells the Cid that they dare not open their doors to him
for fear of the King’s edict. And the events of the poem are brought to
pass before our eyes with a joyful zest and rapidity and a stamp of
truth that are worthy of Homer. We see the Cid ride with a hundred
chosen knights across the Bridge of Alcántara and up Toledo’s narrow
streets. We see him knocking at the gate of San Pedro de Cardeña to bid
farewell to his wife Doña Jimena, and the abbot, who was saying Mass for
the return of dawn, running out with lights and torches to welcome “him
who was born in happy hour.” We see him again in battle as the pennants
rise and fall, we hear “the sword’s griding screech” and the trampling
of the horses at which the earth trembles. In “Celestina,” the long
prose drama of the end of the fifteenth century, we have the same truth
to life, though in very different scenes. Here it is not knights and
battles, but common people of the street--the old hag Celestina, or
Calisto’s servants--that are drawn with a master hand.

“Celestina” gives some inkling of the picaresque novels to come, of
which the flower and cream is “Lazarillo de Tormes” (1554 is the date of
our earliest edition), to be followed by “Guzmán de Alfarache,” “El
Buscón,” and a long posterity in Spain, France, and England. This is no
tale of true love like the “Celestina,” but of gnawing hunger and of the
ingenious efforts of Lazarillo to procure himself bread. His successive
masters, the blind beggar, the miserly priest, the penniless Castilian
gentleman, the rascally seller of Papal bulls, are sketched in the
autobiography of their servant Lazarillo, with the keen eye of famine,
and are unforgettable, as is Lazarillo himself, whose name has become
the common name in Spain for a blind man’s guide, just as Victor Hugo’s
immortal Gavroche gave his name to the Paris _gamin_. It is, in fact, a
masterpiece of seven short chapters, lively in every sentence, of a
direct and biting humour, perhaps the most graphic story ever penned. A
few terse phrases throw a scene or a character into amazingly high
relief, and the picture is as fresh and living to-day as when it first
appeared three and a half centuries ago. No other country and no other
language could have produced a piece of realism so cynically bare, so
completely charming. It has the caustic pithiness of Spanish proverbs,
the bitter flavour of harsh Iberia. It belongs to life rather than to
literature, but life portrayed with the restraint and force of a
consummate art. It was early translated into English as “The Marvelus
Dedes and the Lyf of Lazaro de Tormes.” The authorship of “Lazarillo”
has been ascribed to this man and to that, and there has been great
argument about it and about, without the least degree of certainty. The
name of Hurtado de Mendoza is frequently to be found upon the
title-page. Born in 1503, he was alive when the novel appeared; he was
an author; he could write in trenchant, nay, in scurrilous style, as his
letters concerning the Pope show--he calls him an old rascal, _vellaco_;
but these are hardly conclusive proofs. Whoever the author, the work
still reigns supreme, though many may have thought with Ginés de
Pasamonte in “Don Quixote” that it would be an evil moment for
“Lazarillo” when their memoirs appeared. Half a century after
“Lazarillo” the same faithfulness to picaresque reality, with a broader
outlook and a more universal sympathy, is to be found in the “Novelas
Ejemplares” of Cervantes. Rinconete and Cortadillo, the eponymous heroes
of one of his best-known stories, are closely related to Lazarillo; they
are in fact the Lazarillos of the South of Spain. On the realism of “Don
Quixote” it is unnecessary to lay stress. Mr. Fitzmaurice-Kelly,
referring to its immediate triumph, says: “To contemporary readers the
charm of ‘Don Quixote’ lay in its amalgamation of imaginative and
realistic elements, in its accumulated episodes, in its infinite
sympathy and its persuasive humour. There was no question, then, as to
whether ‘Don Quixote’ was a well of symbolic doctrine. The canvas was
crowded with types familiar to every one who had eyes to see his
companions on the dusty highways of Spain. The wenches who served Don
Quixote with stockfish and black bread; the lad Andrés, flayed in the
grove of oaks by Juan Haldudo the Rich of Quintanar; the goatherds
seated round the fire on which the pot of salted goat was simmering;
the three lively needle-makers from the Colt of Córdoba; the midnight
procession escorting the dead body from Baeza to Segovia, and chanting
dirges on the road; the dozen galley-slaves tramping on, strung together
like beads on an iron chain; all these are observed and presented with
masterly precision of detail.”[94]

In spite of Censors and Inquisitors Spanish literature was free and
outspoken, for it portrayed life as it was. If it shows devotion to
Church and King it is because these were deeply-rooted national
convictions. But the priests sometimes meet with less respect. The Cid
threatens to make of the Pope’s vestments trappings for his horse, and
we have seen that Hurtado de Mendoza, the King of Spain’s ambassador in
Rome, speaks of his Holiness in terms that call to mind Benvenuto
Cellini’s passionate outbursts. We have seen, too, the unflattered
portraits of priest and pardon-seller in “Lazarillo de Tormes.”
Cervantes, who “respects and adores the Church as a Catholic and
faithful Christian,” does not fail to thrust fun at the fat _alforjas_,
the well-provisioned saddle-bags of the _señores clérigos_, “who rarely
allow themselves to fare ill,” and he deals more sternly with the
household priests who “govern princes’ houses, and, not being of
princely birth themselves, are unable to guide the conduct of those who
are,” and who “in trying to teach those they govern to be narrow and
limited make them miserable.” He gives us the picture of the false
pilgrims who travel through the length and breadth of Spain, “and there
is not a village in which they do not receive meat and drink and at
least a _real_ in money, and at the end of their journey they leave the
country with a treasure of over a hundred ducats,” and he even allows
himself to wonder why Ginés de Pasamonte’s clever monkey has not been
arraigned before the gentlemen of the Inquisition.

There are in Spanish literature occasional signs of a distorted
imagination, a restless longing to materialize the invisible, which is
not a fanciful dreaming, but rather a kind of super-realism, a strained
and persistent effort to attain a tangible perfection--the spirit which
in some Spanish buildings has added ornament to ornament till the result
is a rich magnificence in an infinity of details but hideousness as a
whole. One form of this we have in such works as Quevedo’s “Sueños,”
another, the Churrigueresque, in the later style of Góngora. On the
other hand, we have the great Spanish mystics in their sincerity,
reflected in the exquisite simplicity of their style, one of the noblest
glories of the literature of their country. Yet they, too, as has often
been pointed out, were pre-eminently practical; Luis de León, for
instance, energetic head of the Augustinian Order; Santa Teresa, the
wise, untiring administrator. Their writings have the fiery transparency
of Pascal, and all the clear and vivid precision of military writers of
many countries, in whose case, as in that of so large a number of
Spaniards, “the lance has not blunted the pen.”[95] The mystics rise to
noble heights of sublimity, but the virtue of their writing is that it
is to the point, with no vague rhetoric; and no advocate could surpass
the lucidity with which Luis de León conducted his own defence before
the Inquisition.

Perhaps the weakest side of Spanish literature is its deficiency in
critical insight. Few, indeed, are the Spanish authors of whom it might
be said, as Ticknor said long ago of Luis de León, that there is
scarcely a line of their poetry that is not exquisite. Espronceda’s
undeniable genius, for instance, shatters itself on that unwieldy
fragment “El Diablo Mundo.” Excessive facility of composition has been
the stumbling-block of the authors as it has been the stumbling-block of
the orators of Spain. Hardly a speaker in the Spanish _Cortes_ is ever
at a loss for words to give expression to his ideas or to conceal the
lack of them. Each, as Don Adriano de Armado in “Love’s Labour’s Lost,”
is one

    “That hath a mint of phrases in his brain,
     One whom the music of his own vain tongue
     Doth ravish like enchanting harmony.”

Even so marvellous an orator as Emilio Castelar was at times carried
away by the magnificent eloquence that flowed unfailingly from his lips.
In the same way Lope de Vega could throw off a play in a few days. Over
2000 plays and _autos_ are ascribed to him, and in the 450 that remain
his most ardent admirers confess that there are arid tracts. And,
ordinarily, this copiousness has been a fault, telling against Spanish
literature, and it continues to be a fault: Señor Blasco Ibáñez writes
his brilliant novels in evident haste; Señor Perez Galdós has entered
on the fifth series of ten of his “Episodios Nacionales,” and his other
novels and plays are very numerous. Such wealth of production could not
but be harmful to critical judgment. In the nineteenth century Spain
produced one or two excellent critics, especially Larra and _Clarín_,
the pseudonym of Leopoldo Alas, author of “La Regenta,” one of the most
striking psychological novels of the century. Generally, however, if
German literary criticism is circular and, however illuminating the
by-paths of its learning, wanders round the point without ever quite
touching it, Spanish literary criticism is superficial, and either veils
the point in a polite mesh of words, or is prevented by this very
rhetoric from seeing the point at all. Even Valera, who so carefully
limned his own prose, and whose verse, though not inspired, is always
delicate and polished, was far from being a good critic. He praised
effusively works that at best deserved silence, and this insincerity in
literary matters is, it is to be feared, a common weakness in Spain.

The characteristic of Spanish literature that unites it in a special
bond of sympathy with English literature is its large store of humour.
It meets us in the “Poema del Cid,” in the character of the Cid, and in
the quick detection of the ludicrous; the poems of the Archpriest of
Hita are full of merriment and of humorous portrayal of character; the
humour of the Archpriest reappears in “Lazarillo de Tormes,” but without
his jovial gaiety; with Quevedo its vein becomes cruelly satirical.
Humour did not desert Luis de León when ill and solitary in the dark
Valladolid prison of the Inquisition; and it is to be found in a large
majority of Spanish authors, being but another side of their direct,
unclouded observation. In the most humorous of all books, even Don
Quixote, the Knight of the Sad Countenance, is constrained to laugh: at
the sight of Sancho, we read, his melancholy was not strong enough to
prevent him from joining in his laughter--and the whole world laughs
with, not at him.

It is because Spanish literature is intensely national that it has so
universal an interest, and in its most recent phase, the novel, it has a
local character that is full of charm. José María de Pereda, for
instance, scarcely ever left his native Cantabrian province. He wrote of
the places and people that he understood and loved. Yet no one who has
read his great novels, “El Sabor de la Tierruca,” or “Sotileza,” or
“Peñas Arriba,” will contend that they are provincial, or that their
interest is merely local.[96] His characters are universal, and Pereda
is another instance of the truth that he who digs a little land deep
reaps a better reward than he who works shallowly over a wide extent. So
Señor Blasco Ibáñez is read with most delight when he cultivates his own
garden--the city and province of Valencia.




XVII

THE POEM OF THE CID


1.--A PRIMITIVE MASTERPIECE

The national hero of Spain has been presented in many guises, but is
nowhere more intensely Spanish than in the “Poema del Cid.” Here are no
marvellous events and miracles, no journeyings out of Spain to Paris and
Rome; everything occurs naturally and simply in Spanish surroundings,
and this the first great masterpiece of Spanish letters has a strong
flavour of the soil. After winning a “victory marvellous and great” over
the Moors in Spain, the Cid says, “I give thanks to God who is Master of
the world; I was in want before, now I am rich, for I have goods and
land and gold and honour.... Moors and Christians live in great fear of
me. There, inland in Morocco, where the Mosques are, they look to have
some night an inroad from me. It is but their fear, for I think not of
it. I shall not go to seek them, in Valencia shall I be.” The Cid is
chivalrous, brave, magnanimous, simple, with a strong sense of humour
and love of fair-play. With simple good faith the poet sees no need to
explain or excuse actions of his hero that may seem blameworthy to a
later age, such as the deceit practised upon the two Jews. Though not
historical, the poem has an air of truth and sincerity deeply
impressive. It was probably composed in the middle of the twelfth
century, not much more than fifty years after the Cid’s death in 1099.
It has been attributed to the beginning of the thirteenth century, but
intrinsic evidence warrants the earlier date. The language is more
archaic than that of thirteenth-century writers. Traces of the Latin
chrysalis appear. “To-morrow morning” is _cras á la mañana_, half Latin
and half Spanish, and “each” in the same way is _quiscadauno_, while the
word _huebos_, which frequently occurs in the sense of _menester_, is
but the Latin _opus_ thinly disguised. The poem, as it has come down to
us incomplete, has nearly four thousand verses. It is written in long
assonant lines of unequal number of syllables. “The poet,” as Tomas
Antonio Sánchez, who first edited the “Poema del Cid” in 1779, remarks,
“thought nothing of giving two or three syllables more to a line as his
sentence might require,” and lines of eleven and lines of eighteen
syllables occur indifferently. From beginning to end the story moves on
without flagging; the style is so rapid and direct that it carries the
reader with it. There is a joy and freshness in the narrative that have
rarely been surpassed.[97] These events may not have happened, or may
have happened differently, but that matters little, since, owing to the
skill of the unknown poet, they stand out with a vividness that imprints
them indelibly on the mind of the reader and proves that nothing is so
real as that which has not happened. Who can forget, for instance, the
arrival of King Alfonso and the Cid at Toledo, when the King passes on
into the town, but the Cid remains on the further side of the Tagus, in
the castle of San Serván (now a beautiful ruin with two Moorish windows
still left, and surrounded by dwarf-asphodels in spring). He says to the
King: “I with mine will rest in San Serván; this evening will my
followers arrive. I will hold vigil in that holy place; to-morrow
morning I will enter the city.” Here he and his followers “said matins
and prime until the dawn,” and next day they enter Toledo, the Cid
splendidly attired and accompanied by a hundred knights, riding across
the bridge of Alcántara and up the steep and narrow street to the Court
or Parliament.[98] Every detail of his dress is given, purple and gold
and silver. But fresh and quaintly vivid details are frequent in the
poem. When the counts of Carrión have outraged and abandoned their
wives the poet pauses to exclaim, “What good fortune were the Cid
Campeador to appear.” Félez Muñoz, on finding the Cid’s daughters almost
at the point of death, brings them water in his hat: “new it was and
fresh, and he had brought it from Valencia.” Mass is said “at half
cock-crow, before the dawn.” The Moor Abengalvon upbraids the treachery
of his guests in planning his murder as follows: “Tell me what have I
done to you, Counts of Carrión? I serving you without guile, and you
took counsel for my death, _Hyo sirviendovos sin art, E vos conseiastes
para mi muert_.” Nothing could be more spontaneous and direct. With
equal directness honest Pero Bermuez calls one of the Counts of Carrión
“a tongue without hands,” “a mouth without truth,” and we read of Asur
González, who “would breakfast before he went to prayer,” that “purple
he came for he had breakfasted, and reckless was his speech.” The
account of the battle is well known: “they clasp their shields before
their breasts, they lower their lances with their banners, they bow
their faces over the saddles, they went to smite them with bold hearts.
With loud voice calls he who was born in happy hour, ‘Strike them,
knights, for the love of charity. I am Ruy Diaz, the Cid Campeador of
Bibar.’ All strike in the group where is Pero Bermuez. Three hundred
lances are there, all with their banners. A Moor apiece they killed at a
single blow, and as they turned about they kill as many more. There
would you see many lances rise and fall, many a shield pierced and
riddled, many a breastplate broken through, many white banners come out
red with blood, many good steeds go without a rider. The Moors call on
Mahomet, the Christians on St. James. In a short space a thousand and
three hundred of the Moors are slain.” No version can give an idea of
the vigour of the original. But it is not only battle scenes that are
treated forcibly and thrown into high relief. We may take the arrival of
the Cid at San Pedro de Cardeña as an example of the amazing vividness
given to more quiet episodes: “The cocks are crowing and the dawn is
trying to break, when the good Campeador arrived at San Pedro. The Abbot
Don Sancho, servant of the Creator, was saying Matins for the return of
dawn. And Doña Jimena, with five noble ladies, was praying St. Peter and
the Creator: ‘O Thou who guidest all, be with my Cid the Campeador.’ He
was calling at the gate and they heard the summons. Heavens! how glad
was the Abbot Don Sancho! With lights and with candles they ran into the
courtyard. With such joy they receive him who was born in happy hour. ‘I
thank God, my Cid,’ said the Abbot Don Sancho, ‘since I see you here,
accept my hospitality.’”


II. VALENCIA DEL CID.

The poem opens abruptly with the exile of the Cid from Castille. He
rides to his house at Burgos but finds all closed against him. Only a
nine-year-old girl is found to tell him that “last night came the King’s
letter. We dare not open or receive you, else would we lose our goods
and houses, and moreover the eyes of our heads.”

To obtain money the Cid fills two chests with sand, and on these
“covered with red leather, and studded with nails well-gilt,” he obtains
six hundred marks from the Jews Rachel and Vidas. They are not to open
the chests for a year. On the wall in the cloister of the Cathedral at
Burgos still hangs an ancient chest known as the _Cofre del Cid_. Thus
furnished, the Cid leaves Castille, and he prays solemnly to God and the
glorious Saint Mary, “for here I leave Castille, since the King is wrath
with me, and I know not if in all my days I shall enter it again.” He
takes leave of his wife and children at the Convent of San Pedro de
Cardeña, and, after early Mass said by the Abbot Don Sancho, departs,
wistfully turning his head to look back. Doña Jimena, his wife, prays
for his safety to the “glorious Lord the Father, who madest Heaven and
Earth, and thirdly, the sea, who madest stars and moon and the sun to
give heat.” Already men were flocking to the Cid’s banner, and his first
exploit is the capture of the town of Castejon. He lies in ambush before
it: “The dawn is breaking, and morning was at hand. The sun went forth,
Heavens! how beautiful it rose. In Castejon all were awaking. They open
the gates, and quickly went forth to see their work in the fields and
their possessions.” When they were all gone forth, the Cid took the
town. The next town, Alcocer, he also captures by a wile. “The news
grieves those of Teca, the men of Teruel it does not please; it pleases
not the men of Calatayud.” A host of Moors besieges the Cid in Alcocer,
and after three weeks, the provisions failing, he goes forth and gains a
great victory. At the sound of the drums of the Moorish host “the earth
was like to crack.” He pursues the enemy to the walls of Calatayud.
_Fata Calatayuth duró el segudar._ He sends Alvar Fáñez to _Castiella la
gentil_ with a present of thirty horses for King Alfonso and money for
Doña Jimena, and for a thousand masses at Santa María de Burgos.
Zaragoza agrees to pay tribute to the Cid. Don Remont Berenger, Count of
Barcelona, goes out against him, and persists in coming to an
engagement, though the Cid sends him a message: “I have nothing of his,
bid him let me go in peace.” The result is a crushing defeat of the
“army of the Franks,” and the Count is taken prisoner. The account of
his captivity is entertaining. The Count refuses all food: “‘I will not
eat a mouthful for all there is in Spain. I will rather die (lit. lose
my body and leave my soul) since such ill-equipped men have beaten me in
battle.’ You will hear what said my Cid Ruy Diaz: ‘Eat, Count, of this
bread and drink this wine; if you do as I say you shall be free, if not
in all your days you shall not see Christian land.’” The Count eats
nothing for three days: “They dividing these great spoils cannot make
him eat a piece of bread.” Then the Cid renews his promise to give him
liberty: “But of what you have lost and I won in the field know that I
will not give you any part, but what you have lost I will not give you,
for I have need of it for me and for my vassals, and will not give it
you.” At length the Count yields. “The Count is eating, Heavens! with
what good will. Over against him sat he who was born in happy hour: ‘If
you eat not well, Count, and I am not satisfied, here we shall remain,
we shall not part.’... The Cid, who is watching him, is satisfied, so
quickly did Count Remont move his hands,” and he escorts him on his way.
The Count takes his leave and “goes turning his head and looking back;
with fear he went that the Cid will repent, that which he would not do
for all that is in the world.” Fresh victories follow. The Cid carries
the war “over against the salt sea” and takes among other towns
Murviedro (the old Saguntum and modern Sagunto). Here he is besieged by
the Valencians, but sallies forth and defeats them. _Fata Valencia duró
el segudar._ For three years he continues to wage war and take towns.
“The fame of my Cid, know well, is noised abroad.” “The inhabitants of
Valencia know not what to do. From no quarter came bread, father and son
are without counsel, friend cannot comfort friend. A bad thing, Sirs, it
is to have a lack of bread.” After a siege of nine months the Cid takes
Valencia. He establishes a Christian bishopric in his new town, and
sends a present of a hundred horses to King Alfonso. Alvar Fáñez on his
return escorts Doña Jimena and her daughters Elvira and Sol to Valencia.
The Cid bids them welcome to the city: “‘You, loved and honoured wife,
and both my daughters, my heart and my soul, enter with me the city of
Valencia, the possession that I have won you.’ Mother and daughters
kissed his hands, with such honour entered they Valencia. My Cid went
with them to the Citadel: he led them up to the highest part. Velvet
eyes glance on all sides. They look at Valencia, how the city lies, and
on the other side they have the sea. They look on the plain, luxuriant,
and large. They raise their hands to pray to God. So glad is my Cid and
his companions for this good and great spoil. The winter is departing,
and March is about to come in....” The Moorish King Jucef, with “fifty
times a thousand” Moors, comes up against the Cid, but is defeated with
great slaughter. “There escaped not more than a hundred and four.” A
fresh present of two hundred horses is sent to King Alfonso. The Counts
of Carrión now determine to ask for the Cid’s daughters in marriage, and
the King proposes an interview with the Cid “above the Tagus, which is a
principal river.” The marriage is arranged, and the Counts return with
the Cid to Valencia, where the wedding festivities last a full
fortnight. The guests depart laden with presents from the Cid. “Rich
return to Castille those who had come to the wedding.” And here there is
a very definite division in the poem. “The verses of this song have here
an ending. May the Creator be with you and all his Saints” (lines, 2286,
7). The remainder of the poem tells of the treachery and punishment of
the Counts of Carrión. It begins with the incident of the lion. A lion
that was kept in the court of the Cid’s house escaped one day as the Cid
lay asleep. His trusty followers drew round him to keep him from harm,
but of the Counts of Carrión one scrambled under the Cid’s bench, the
other ran out by the door crying: “I shall not see Carrión,” and hid
behind the beam of a wine-press, so that his cloak and doublet were all
soiled. The Cid, having cowed the lion, “asked for his sons-in-law, but
found them not. They call aloud for them, but none answers. When they
found them and they came, they came all pale. You have not seen such
jests as went about the Court. My Cid the Campeador ordered that they
should cease.” Further events showed the small spirit and treachery of
the Cid’s sons-in-law, and his daughters are ultimately betrothed to
nobler men, the Infantes of Navarre and Aragon. The poem, as we have it,
ends with a prayer that God may give Paradise to him who wrote (_i.e._
copied) it, and with a request for money or a glass of wine for its
reciters: “Dat nos del vino si non tenedes dineros.”




XVIII

A PRISONER OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION


I.--NOVEDADES

The poetry of Luis de León is not voluminous; he has no great variety of
theme; he sings “the quiet life of him who shuns the world’s uproar;”
but there is, as has been said, scarcely a line of it that is not
exquisite. And if, as a lyric poet, Luis de León stands in the front of
Spanish literature, as a writer of eloquent and well-moulded Castilian
prose he has had few equals. His “Nombres de Cristo” is one of the
masterpieces of the Spanish language. The sentences are perhaps
occasionally too prolix, lengthening out in a rich profusion of words
and images. He had, as Ticknor said, a Hebrew soul, and he delighted in
similes. It is indeed partly this that gives to his style a colour and a
sound which rank him among the greatest prose-writers of any age. But as
a writer Luis de León is too well known to need comment. And to himself
his literary works were of a secondary importance, and held a
subordinate place in his strenuous and energetic life. Born in 1527, of
a well-known family at Belmonte in La Mancha, he was sent by his father
at the age of fourteen to the University of Salamanca with the advice to
“follow the common opinion in letters, _que siguiese la opinión comun en
las letras_.” The precept was not unneeded in that age, for the
Reformation had unhinged men’s beliefs and left them a prey to many
fears. Intolerance on the side of reformers was answered by fresh
intolerance. In Spain one might least expect any dissent from the
accepted religion. Even in Spain, however, the general ferment of the
rest of Europe had found an echo, the spirit of doubt and inquiry had
penetrated to the Spanish Universities, and men’s minds were opening to
new lines of thought. There was indeed ample scope for reform.
Scholasticism had become a dry and stilted system, well qualified to
call down ridicule on all learning. Its professors delighted in
hairsplitting and quibbles. Luis de León speaks with a scathing sarcasm
of the type of professor who said that he was ... “content with a
knowledge of St. Thomas and the Saints ... and had no wish for any new
learning (_novedades_);” of those who “flatter themselves and fancy
that, because they have in their rooms a score of books covered with
dust, and have obtained the degree of master of arts, they have well
earned the name of men of letters, and may for the rest give themselves
up quite securely to sleep and good living ... and they consider that
the mere fact of having the books and dipping into some part of them
once a year bestows on them a knowledge of St. Thomas and the Saints.”
But the new spirit of inquiry and reform led those who belonged to the
old school to fence themselves the more closely with narrow and bigoted
beliefs, to cling to conventionalities of dogma, and to cry out on the
most innocent innovations. Violent attacks on Scholasticism had the
effect of showing more moderate attempts at reform in an odious light.
Suspicions were everywhere rife, and it required no little care to avoid
the accusation of being anxious for “new things.” The highest
ecclesiastics were not exempt from attack. Carranza, the Archbishop of
Toledo, had spent a certain number of years in England. In 1556 he had
visited Oxford and found it Catholic, _la encontró católica_, but in the
following year at Cambridge he burnt many heretical books and English
Bibles. On his return to Spain he was thought to have been contaminated
by contact with so many heretics, though he boasted that he had done
more than any other in discovering them.


II.--SALAMANCA UNIVERSITY

In the Universities especially accusations of every kind hung fire over
men marked out by their position or abilities. The University of
Salamanca had always been eminently conservative. Popes and Kings were
anxious for its welfare. Philip II. saw in the University a stronghold
of religion and loyalty. Pedro Chacon tells how “in the year 1560, on
the return of our sovereign Don Philip to Spain after an absence of
several years spent in reducing and governing the kingdom of England, he
at once confirmed all the privileges which the University had received
from his predecessors.” He intervened personally in the general affairs
and particular disputes of the University, and seems to have considered
no trouble too great to preserve the ancient purity of its opinions.
Luis de León became deeply attached to the University, “the light,” as
he said, “not of Spain only, but of all Europe,” and to Salamanca as
student and professor he devoted his entire life. He entered the
Augustinian order a few months after arriving at Salamanca, and by so
doing renounced a very considerable income which he would otherwise have
inherited as his father’s eldest son. His success was rapid. He obtained
the chair of philosophy, and afterwards that of theology, and this
latter chair he still held when he was arrested in the beginning of 1572
and detained for nearly five years in the prison of the Inquisition at
Valladolid. The most serious charges against him were that he had
translated the Song of Solomon into the vulgar tongue, and that he had
depreciated the authority of the Vulgate. But it was a question
primarily between two schools of thought in the University, between the
rival Greek and Hebrew scholars, between the members of the order of St.
Dominic and the members of the order of St. Augustine, and the case only
came under the authority of the Inquisition through the denunciations of
Luis de León’s enemies, such as León de Castro. León de Castro was a
professor of the old school. He was an excellent Latin and Greek
scholar, and was possessed of great energy and perseverance. By his
learning, and partly by sheer force of character, he had won a position
of high authority in the University, and he guarded his authority with a
jealous care. Intolerant of opposition, he sought to crush all who by
their talents or popularity might throw him into the shade. He wished to
reign supreme. He was easily roused to such a pitch of anger that he
lost all control of himself; “when engaged in a dispute,” says Luis de
León, “he does not know what he is doing or saying.” He was hasty in his
judgment of men and opinions, and supplied deficiencies in his own
knowledge by a fierce positiveness. It is said that if he found an
opinion in the work of a saint or philosopher, he would at once say,
“This is the opinion of all the saints, of all the philosophers.” To him
the Vulgate was the final and irrefragable authority, and he opposed
with the utmost vigour those scholars who went back to the Hebrew
original. Such Hebrew scholars he called “Jews,” a name that smelt of
fire in that age. (Against Luis de León the accusation was actually
brought of being a Jew, and descended from Jews.) If it was shown that
the Hebrew text differed from the Vulgate, Castro answered that the
Hebrew text had been altered by the “Jews” since the translation had
been made. His position was thus impregnable. He would listen to no
arguments, but shouted down his opponents. In a narrow age he might
persuade himself that in thus asserting his opinions he was doing good
service to the Church. His influence was without doubt great, and it
needed no little courage to oppose him. Luis de León, however, was not a
man to lie flat and love Setebos. He was frank and open by nature, even
to rashness and indiscretion, and in his eagerness for reform was not
afraid of making enemies. When he took his degree he attacked certain
abuses in a Latin speech of Ciceronian violence, and on another occasion
he publicly upbraided the Dominicans with the heresies of their order,
and the thrust seems to have gone home, for he himself says that they
felt it keenly, “_sintieronse fieramente_.” Above all, he had no
sympathy with pedantry and intolerance. It was impossible that two men
of characters so different should not come into collision, and in fact
the discussions between professors were often marked by boisterous
disputes and all the venom of ill-feeling and discourtesy that sometimes
strangely enough creeps into the daily life of the learned. On one
occasion Luis de León threatened to have Castro’s book--a commentary on
Isaiah--burnt by the Inquisition. On this book Castro had spent much
trouble and much money, and the threat cut him to the quick, so that he
answered that he would have Luis de León himself burnt. And such threats
were not empty words, or the thoughtless bickering of an idle hour. That
Luis de León had many malignant enemies was amply shown at his trial.


III.--IN A VALLADOLID DUNGEON.

The order of imprisonment was issued on the 26th of February, 1572. His
goods were to be confiscated with the exception of a bed and forty
ducats to provide for his food in prison. He was to be seized, wherever
found, “in church, monastery, or other sacred place,” and he was to
bring with him nothing but clothes and linen. A curious clause adds that
“beasts of burden to carry him and his bed, etc., are to be provided at
the customary price, and the price is not to be raised.” He was thus
arrested and conducted to Valladolid. The following description of the
prison is given in the trial of Carranza, Archbishop of Toledo, who had
been confined there some ten years before. “The prison consisted of two
rooms, one for him and one for two servants. They were so remote that
the Archbishop heard nothing of a fire which broke out on the 21st of
September, 1561, and, lasting for a day and a half, consumed more than
four hundred houses, some of them close to the secret prison. The stench
was so intolerable that they were obliged at times to beg that the doors
might be opened, or they would be suffocated. The infection of the place
rendered both master and servants seriously ill, and the doctors of the
Holy Office reported that it was indispensable to bathe the apartment in
pure air morning and evening. In consequence the Inquisitors arranged
that a grating should be made in the door, a device which the Archbishop
scorned as adding insult to injury. The rooms were not swept ... the
shutters of the windows were kept closed, and on some days the
Archbishop had to light a candle at nine in the morning. The food was
brought on broken plates; the sheets served as table-cloth....” In a
letter written to Philip II., after two years of imprisonment, the
Archbishop says, “I fear and expect death daily, and to this end my
treatment seems to have been directed ever since I came here.” The loss
of sun and light, and the actual dirtiness and horror of the place must
have been utterly repulsive to a man of Luis de León’s temperament. In
one of his writings, “La Perfecta Casada,” he says, “Is not cleanliness
the fountain head of beauty--the first and greater part of it?” He loved
the open air, and was wont to regret the loss of liberty which even his
duties as professor at Salamanca entailed. But to the actual and severe
hardships to be undergone there was added, for the devout Catholic, the
more subtle and indefinite torture of the mind. For he could not be
certain that by some involuntary sin he had not incurred degradation in
this life, and punishment unceasing in the next, and in the loneliness
and gloom of the prison these doubts would often recur. Luis de León
acknowledged the full authority of the Inquisition, and his unqualified
submission was not forced or hypocritical, but the fruit of a sincere
conviction. The extreme clearness of his intellect was his safeguard,
and, though he bowed himself in all things to the will of the Church, he
was well assured of his own innocence. Shortly after his arrest he drew
up a profession of faith, declaring that he lived and died “now and in
the future in the faith and belief of the Holy Catholic Church, and
confessing his sins _con entrañable dolor_.” His defence was conducted
throughout in a masterly way. During these five years of suffering he
showed a fine sincerity and a clearness of argument that remind one very
strongly of Pascal. Never was his style more trenchant and lucid, his
reasoning more subtle than in the numerous “Unpublished Documents” that
have come down to us. On no occasion was the patience and humility of
the man more clearly shown. It is a strange reflection that many of
these documents, in accordance with the secrecy of the Inquisition’s
proceedings, were kept hidden from Luis de León himself, and that he
probably never knew, as we know, that he came within a little of being
examined upon the rack. In spite of his ingenious and elaborate defence,
Luis de León’s trial was a long one, and one must shudder to think of
the sufferings and despair of men of weaker metal and less subtle
intellect, such as his intimate friend Grajal, who died in prison. The
Inquisition proceeded as usual in an extremely slow and thorough
fashion. “_Recato y secreto_,” caution and secrecy, were indeed its
watchwords. Witnesses concerning Luis de León’s case were examined in
many parts of Spain, and even at Cuzco, in Peru. It were easy to declaim
against the cruelty and tyranny of the Inquisition, but on closer view
it would seem unjust to lay the blame entirely at its door. The times,
as we have noted, called for the utmost vigilance on the part of the
upholders of the true and Catholic faith. They might hold themselves
bound to investigate with unwearied diligence the most trifling disputes
concerning the doctrine of the Church. Already unorthodox books had been
filtering into Spain. A translation of the Psalms had been received at
Cadiz, and one man alone, a kind of sixteenth-century Borrow, had
brought two bales of heretical books to Seville. The life of the
bookseller was rendered anxious and difficult by such proceedings. In a
letter to the Inquisitors of Valladolid we read: “The booksellers of
this town (Salamanca) have received and continue daily to receive bales
of books from France and other parts. These they dare not open for sale
without permission.” The evil must be stopped before it spread contagion
through the country. It may be argued plausibly that the firmness of the
Inquisition saved Spain from the religious dissensions that raged so
fiercely in France, Germany, and England, nor may it be forgotten that
the centuries of the Inquisition’s most rigorous power were the
centuries of Spain’s greatest literary glory.

Perhaps the harm of the Inquisition was, rather, not that it affected
original thought and research, but that it created in everyday life an
intolerable spirit of suspicion and distrust. It was to the animosity of
their private enemies that the imprisonment of both Archbishop Carranza
and Luis de León was due, and it is difficult to believe in the
sincerity of the witnesses who, “without being cited” and “for the
discharge of their conscience,” laid their accusations before the
Inquisition. In the University of Salamanca there was much prying and
spying, fostered by the rivalries and enmity of the professors. The
professors were elected by the votes of the students after a public
discussion between the candidates on a given theme, and this system
naturally led to considerable ill-feeling and many abuses. During
discussions in the University there would be always some one on the
watch for any specious subject of accusation. Thus, when Luis de León
maintained that “marriage was not in itself an evil but only a less
blessed state than celibacy,” León de Castro had written it down in
order to denounce it to the Inquisition, and in the same way another
professor had gone hastily out during a discussion in order to fetch pen
and ink. On one occasion, when Zuñiga was in Luis de León’s cell at
Salamanca, the latter mentioned a book which his friend, the celebrated
Arias Montano, had sent him. Zuñiga thereupon displayed suspicions of
Montano which Luis de León resented. A few days afterwards, to quote
Luis de León’s own words, “he seemed to me to be still suspicious and,
knowing that he was of a morose spirit and ever inclined to see things
in their worst light, I said to him laughingly: ‘You are indeed a
pessimist; it seems you still think ill of Montano.’ He said, ‘No; of
the man I do not think ill, but I am not certain that it is not my duty
to denounce the book.’” Luis de León goes on to say that more than two
years afterwards he also “had a fit of pessimism, and, considering the
number of heretics who had been discovered and were being discovered
daily in Spain,” determined himself to lay the matter before the
Inquisition--a common way of forestalling an accusation. Again, Medina
examined with most holy zeal (_con santísimo celo_) Luis de León’s
lectures and other papers. The result would be all the more fruitful in
that he would not omit the notes taken by students at the lectures, and,
as Luis de León was well aware, “ignorant students often put a quite
wrong interpretation on what the lecturer said.” Medina did, in fact,
call a meeting of students in his cell and inquired of them if they had
heard or knew of any suspicious or perverted doctrines of Luis de León.
Such methods must multiply means of attack and further spin out a trial.
Of one witness Luis de León, in his defence, said, “This witness is the
Bachelor of Arts Rodríguez, nicknamed ‘Doctor Subtle’ in the University.
I think it is he because he says I left him without an answer, and he
was the only person of that University with whom this happened. For as
he was a man of unsound judgment and sometimes asked impertinent
questions and from what he heard and did not understand collected
nonsensical answers, I grew angry and called him a fool. And at other
times, in order not to become angry and out of humour on his account, I
would give him no answer but flee from him. And he is so witless and
importunate that I remember trying to escape him both indoors and in the
Schools and in the streets, he following and asking absurd questions, I
hurrying on without answering, until at last some of my companions or
other students would push him aside and hold him back by force.” A
little picture of academic life which for vividness it would be hard to
surpass. Luis de León, indeed, was not sparing in his criticism of his
various accusers. Their names, in accordance with the custom of the
Inquisition, were kept from him, but on reading the anonymous
accusations, he referred each one to its true author with unfailing
judgment and was thus enabled to refute them with a sure hand. Of one of
the witnesses who belonged to his own order he said: “He is known among
us as a man who never speaks the truth except by accident.” Of another
he speaks satirically as “most spiritual,” _espiritualísimo_, and says
that the words “kisses,” “embraces,” “bright eyes,” and other words in
the Spanish rendering of the Song of Songs scandalized him; words, that
is, which had not struck him when he read them in Latin, shocked him now
that they were written in the romance. Luis de León was not unaware that
the worst interpretation would be put on his sayings, or reported
sayings, and he was led by this fear himself to lay many trivial details
before the Inquisition. Thus he confessed that at a lecture “the
students furthest from me bade me speak louder, for I was hoarse and
they could not hear me well, and I said: ‘I am hoarse and, you know, it
is better to speak low that the gentlemen of the Inquisition may not
hear.’” He was full of life and humour, and many a chance word spoken in
jest might be twisted by the malicious to an uncatholic implication. He
felt in prison that he was fighting blindfold against many enemies and
asked more than once to be brought face to face with his accusers. “And
thus,” he says, “they speak from afar as men in safety and free, while
I, blind and in prison, cannot see who is attacking me.” Many absurd
charges were brought against him. According to one witness he “always
said low mass, even on a feast day, and no one could hear what he said
as he mumbled ‘tu, tu, tu,’ and made an end very speedily.” Another
accusation seems to have been based on a mere quibble between the words
_vino_, “wine,” and _vinó_, “came.” For at a dinner some one seems to
have asked for wine and Fray Luis to have said that it was doubtful if
it had come; but, according to the witness, all understood his answer to
refer to the coming of Christ! Another witness said that he was “a very
clever theologian, but somewhat bold in his lectures”--a charge less
petty than the preceding, but from its vagueness scarcely less
ridiculous. In the same spirit Castro “had heard say,” “thought that he
had heard”; Medina “thought that he saw in Fray Luis an inclination to
new things.” Such charges coming from enemies made his innocence, as he
said, “clearer than the light of noon.” Minute points were elaborately
dealt with. For instance, the sale of Castro’s book on Isaiah had been
spoilt, he said, by the Jews (Luis de León and his friends); according
to Luis de León, the real reason of its failure was its size and
costliness. As to the accusation of being, in fact, by descent a Jew, it
would appear that Fray Luis’ great-grandmother, or rather the second
wife of his great-grandfather, was of Jewish origin.

The one serious charge was, indeed, that he did not give due authority
to the Vulgate. It is probable that his attitude had been inopportune at
a time when the Vulgate was being attacked on all sides by the heretics,
and that the numerous students who attended his lectures were apt to
exaggerate his doctrine.

And so the trial dragged on. Luis de León began to lose patience. “If
only,” he exclaims, “the sun were divided fairly between me and my
accusers”--a metaphor borrowed from duelling. He complains frequently of
unnecessary delay. He writes to the Inquisitors, “You are delaying the
conclusion of my trial without just cause,” “without cause and to the
one end of lengthening out my imprisonment, and with the wish to put a
term to my life, since you find me without fault.” He begs that there be
no more delay “considering the length of time I have been here, and the
small cause there was for bringing me here, and the enmity and notorious
calumnies that began and occasioned this scandal.” His imprisonment, he
says, is “a long, harsh and cruel torment.” Partly constant
communications between Valladolid and Madrid caused delay. Thus a
request of Fray Luis, made on the 20th of August, did not receive an
answer from the Supreme Tribunal at Madrid till the 20th of September.
Partly, too, it must be admitted that after the scandal and excitement
caused by his imprisonment at Salamanca, where he had a host of friends
and followers, it would seem almost as if the Inquisitors were unwilling
to release him with the confession that the whole matter had been smoke
without a fire; and the longer the trial continued the greater,
naturally, would become their embarrassment.

He was allowed some books and a few other articles. Thus he asks for a
crucifix, a brass candlestick, a knife, “to cut what I eat,” the works
of St. Leon, a Hebrew Bible, a Sophocles in Greek, a Pindar in Greek and
Latin, etc. He complains that he is not properly attended, and “it has
happened that I have fainted with hunger from having no one to give me
food, and I beg that I may be given a monk of my order to serve me if
you do not wish to allow me to die alone between four walls.” He was not
allowed the use of the Sacraments, and in his frequent illness this was
a constant torture. “You persist,” he says, “in keeping me in prison as
if I were a heretic, deprived of the use of the Sacraments, with
manifest danger to my life and to my soul, though you bring no fresh
charge against me.” He therefore begs them, pending the sentence, to
“allow me at least a free death among my monks.” Seeing that the
conclusion of his case was delayed from day to day he implores, in
another petition, to be transported to some monastery in Valladolid that
he may die there as a Christian. “This is the only thing that I solicit
or desire, since the passion of my enemies and my own sins have taken
from me all that one desires in life.”


IV.--EX FORTI DULCEDO.

On the 28th September, 1576, the sentence is at length pronounced. The
majority of the judges “are of opinion that Fray Luis de León be put to
the torture as to his meaning, and as to what has been witnessed against
him, and as to the propositions that have been noted as heretical, in
spite of the fact that the theologians profess finally to be satisfied
with them and to give them the meaning that Fray Luis would have them
bear; and that the torture to be applied to him be moderate, seeing that
the accused is of delicate health; and that the results obtained be then
further examined.” This was the verdict of four out of the seven judges;
one gave no decision; the remaining two were of opinion that the accused
should be reprimanded in the Court of the Holy Office, and that in the
general hall of the greater Schools of Salamanca, in the presence of the
students and other persons of the University, he should declare his
propositions to be suspicious and ambiguous; that he should be forbidden
to lecture in the Schools or elsewhere, and that his translation of the
Song of Solomon should be prohibited and withdrawn from circulation.

The superior and more impartial tribunal of Madrid quashed the sentence,
and Luis de León was not questioned on the rack. It ordered (7th
December, 1576) that Fray Luis de León should be acquitted and
admonished in the Court of the Holy Office to be careful in future how
he treated of matters so dangerous as those implicated in the trial. The
sentence pronounced runs as follows: “We find, in accordance with the
decrees and on the merits of the said suit, that it is our duty to
absolve and we do absolve the said Fray Luis de León from the burden of
this trial.” He requested and obtained a declaration that he had been
acquitted without penance or stain whatsoever, and was free to exercise
all his duties in the University.

Luis de León’s health had never been robust, and the hardships of his
imprisonment broke it completely. That he survived is probably due to
his fortitude and mystic faith. In a dedication to Cardinal Quiroga, he
says: “When I was on trial, owing to the intrigues of certain of my
enemies, and was branded as suspicious in the faith, and was cut off not
only from the conversation but from the intercourse and very sight of
men, and was buried in a prison for five years, in the midst of all this
I felt a peace and joyfulness of spirit which I often miss now that I am
restored to the light of day and to my friends.”

These years spent in prison were not passed in idleness. Besides the
business of his defence, he wrote several of his poems during this time
and his long treatise “Los Nombres de Cristo.” Many know his short poem
beginning, “Here falsehood and wrong kept me imprisoned,” and ending
with the line so often quoted in Spanish literature, “ni envidiado ni
envidioso.” And we may refer to this time of his imprisonment such
passages as “No pinta el prado aquí la primavera”--

    “Here with the spring the meadows are not gay
     Nor the clouds golden in the rising sun;
     No nightingale pours forth its plaintive lay:
     But here the night is sleepless, and the day
     Is full of tears and unconsoling sorrow,
     And the sad present has a sadder morrow....”

Or the beautiful poem beginning “Virgen que el sol más pura”--

    “Virgin purer than the sun,
     Glory of mortals, of the heavens light,
     Whose pity is not less than thy great might,...”

Without the enforced leisure of these years we cannot doubt that his
“Nombres de Cristo” would never have been written, and Spanish prose
would have lacked one of its most luminous and brilliant jewels.

Spanish literature owes him a great gratitude for having written in
Spanish, contrary to the prejudices of the learned, who held that a
writing to be profound must be obscure, and “marvelled that a theologian
of whom they expected some great treatise full of deep questions had
ended by writing a book in romance.” But Luis de León wished, he says,
to open the “new path” of good style, that consists “both in what is
said and in the way of saying it, and in the task of choosing the best
words of those in common use, and considering the sound of them, and
even at times of counting the letters, and weighing and measuring and
mingling them, that the matter be presented not only with clearness but
with softness and harmony.”

Nearly five years after his arrest Luis de León returned to Salamanca.
He returned entirely justified, and the University welcomed him back
with rejoicing. Over the Augustinian Order especially his trial had hung
like a cloud, and the condemnation of so distinguished a professor must
have been felt as a disgrace by the whole University. The legend is well
known. When Luis de León resumed his lectures the entire University
thronged to hear him. He was enjoined by the Inquisition to preserve
complete silence as to its proceedings, but this was an occasion at
least for subtle and indirect allusions, and for the excitement of
general sympathy. Luis de León rose in the crowded room and began his
lecture with the words: “Gentlemen, we were saying yesterday,” and so
continued his course. The intervening five years were obliterated. The
story is so thoroughly in keeping with the character of the man, whose
simplicity and sincere humility produced an effect unattainable by the
most studious artifice, that we would willingly maintain its truth. We
would thrust aside the prosaic facts that Luis de León did not resume
his lectures, the chair having been occupied in his absence, and he
acquiescing in this on his return (_la daba por bien empleada_), and
that, when he was assigned another course of lectures, a long dispute
arose in the University as to the hour at which he should deliver them.
We may say at least that, if the story is not literal in the facts, in
spirit it is essentially true. The quaint kind of pulpit from which the
words were spoken, and the lecture-room with its rough-hewn benches, are
still preserved in the University at Salamanca, and the sublime words,
“_Decíamos ayer_,” form part of the _repertoire_ of the tourist’s
cicerone.

Luis de León, on the recovery of his freedom, might exclaim, in the
words of the Persiles of Cervantes (Cervantes, who professed himself
Luis de León’s “reverent votary and follower,” _á quien yo reverencio,
adoro y sigo_): “I give you thanks, immense and merciful Heavens, that
you have brought me to die where your light may look upon my death, and
not in the shades of the dark prison-house which I now leave.” He
survived for fifteen years, dying on the 23rd of August, 1591, nine days
after being promoted from Vicar-General to Provincial of his Order. His
good humour and natural gaiety, his unselfishness and common-sense, won
for him many and strong friendships--we feel, indeed, that he was a man
not without failings, but entirely lovable. He had been commanded by the
Inquisitor-General to publish his own works, and was entrusted with the
publication of those of Santa Teresa. His second Inquisition trial arose
apparently from a lecture on the vexed question of predestination and
freewill. It was declared that the University of Salamanca was greatly
scandalized at the boldness with which he maintained that the contrary
of his own opinion was heresy. The matter, however, ended by his being
“benevolently and lovingly admonished” at Toledo. Besides these and many
other occupations, he gave ungrudging help to the Carmelite nuns in
asserting their independence, which was threatened by a reform
sanctioned by Philip II. The Pope, indeed, was favourable to the nuns,
but the King opposed the Papal Brief, and Luis de León is reported to
have said: “It is impossible to carry out a single order of His Holiness
in Spain.” The story that Fray Luis died of grief on account of the
King’s anger at this opposition is certainly untrue, although it is
likely enough that the King was annoyed. He is said to have exclaimed:
“Quien le mete á Frai Luis en estas cosas?--What has Fray Luis to do in
this _galère_?” Luis de León’s life was thus not without many turmoils.
But we may like best to think of him, as in the description in his
“Nombres de Cristo,” “in the month of June, after the Feast of St. John
when the Salamanca term breaks up,” retiring from a long year of work to
the country house possessed by his monastery on the banks of the Tormes.
There, in the great garden of trees growing without order, with a stream
“running and pausing as if in laughter,” and with the winding river
Tormes in sight--“a place far better than the professor’s chair”--he
would meditate alone or converse with friends “in the cool of the
morning, on a day most calm and bright;” “for,” he says elsewhere in the
same work, “it may be that in towns there is more refinement of speech,
but fineness of sentiment is of the country and of solitude.”




XIX

THE MODERN SPANISH NOVEL


I.--REVIVAL. FERNÁN CABALLERO

The success of “Don Quixote” might have been expected to fire a host of
imitators, but the seventeenth century in Spain was given rather to the
drama than to the novel, and the eighteenth century “was an age of
barrenness in Spain, so far as concerns romance.”[99] In the first half
of the nineteenth century the Spanish novel was for the most part a pale
imitation of Sir Walter Scott, and these somewhat insipid romances, in
spite of the wealth of subjects afforded by Spanish history, were not
genuinely Spanish; they were due to a taste imported by returning
exiles, and were not a natural growth of the soil. Thus the Condesa
Pardo Bazán could say that in Spain the novel has no yesterday, only an
_anteayer_, a day before yesterday, and the appearance of Fernán
Caballero’s “La Gaviota” was hailed by a Spanish critic as a link
between Cervantes and the nineteenth century. It marked, indeed, the
revival of realistic fiction in Spain. Cecilia Böhl von Faber, daughter
of a distinguished German settled in Spain, was born in Switzerland in
1796, but passed nearly the whole of her life in Spain, and chiefly at
Seville. She combined German depth with the wit and clear vision of
Andalucía. A discerning Madrid critic reviewing “La Gaviota,” the first
published work of the then unknown Fernán Caballero--it had been written
first in French, and now appeared in Spanish in the pages of “El
Heraldo” (1848-49)--said that it displayed a mixture of the German and
Andalusian Schools, the pencil of Dürer, and the colouring of Murillo. A
character in “La Gaviota” observes: “Were I Queen of Spain, I would
command a novel of customs to be written in every province.” It was the
_novela de costumbres_ that Fernán Caballero wrote with such brilliant
success. She wished, she said, to show Spain as it really was, and not
as it was commonly painted by foreigners.

Cecilia Böhl von Faber was thrice married--to Spaniards--and it was as
Marquesa de Arco Hermoso, living on her husband’s estate at Dos
Hermanas, a small village near Seville, that the idea first occurred to
her to collect the fast-disappearing customs and traditions of the
peasants. She came into frequent touch with them owing to her wish to
learn their individual needs, and know how best to administer her
charity. The thirteen years from her second marriage in 1822, to the
death of the Marqués de Arco Hermoso, in 1835, were spent mainly at
Seville, at their house in the _Plaza de San Vicente_, or in the
neighbourhood. The story _La Familia de Albareda_, the scene of which is
Dos Hermanas, was then written, from events that actually occurred in
this village, although it was not published till later. It was when her
third husband was absent in Australia that she thought of publishing her
stories, and took her _nom de plume_ from a small village of La Mancha,
called Fernán Caballero. The appearance of “La Gaviota,” which is,
indeed, one of the best, if not the best, of Fernán’s novels, aroused
considerable surprise and enthusiasm, and many surmises as to who might
be the author. It was a work so unlike the romantic tales and insipid
imitations then in vogue; it showed so fresh and spontaneous an
inspiration. Here were no echoes of older novelists; all was written
from keen personal observation, and the reader was enabled by the
author’s art to realize in words scenes and characters which he had
known and felt, but had been unable to express.

After the tragic death of her third husband, in 1859, Fernán Caballero
was firmly resolved to enter a convent, but her friends did their utmost
to dissuade her, and she believed, moreover, that the only books she
would be allowed to read would be those of devotion. Finally she gave up
this idea, and lived for nearly ten years in one of the houses of the
_Patio de las Banderas_ in the Seville Alcázar, granted to her by Queen
Isabel II. It would be difficult to imagine a more pleasant home for a
writer. On one side the beautiful gardens of the Alcázar, with their
myrtles, palms, and oranges, clipped box-hedges, and white marble
fountains; on the other the _Plaza del Triunfo_, planted with
orange-trees, acacias and palms, and the Cathedral and wonderful Giralda
tower. The Revolution of 1868 came to destroy this peace. The Alcázar
became for the time the property of the nation, and Fernán Caballero was
driven to seek a home elsewhere. She was for other reasons, as a devout
Roman Catholic and Royalist, deeply distressed by the Revolution and its
sacrilegious results in Seville. The pettiness of many revolutionary
measures was shown by the fact that the night-watchmen--the
_serenos_--of Seville were forbidden, in calling out the hours, to use
the traditional preface “Ave María Purísima.” Fernán Caballero obtained
the reversal of this decree. She lived to listen with tears of joy to
the bells of the Giralda, as they rang out the news of the Restoration
and the beginning of Alfonso XII.’s reign. She was then living in the
curving, silent bye-steet that now bears her name. No. 14 is
distinguished from the other houses by having, besides the _patio_, a
garden with a large lemon-tree, and other shrubs. Here she died in the
spring of 1877, in her eighty-first year. The Queen came to visit her
here, and a memorial tablet was placed above the entrance of the house
by her friends the Duke and Duchess of Montpensier.

The quality that gives imperishable value to Fernán’s work is its truth:
the scenes are at once felt to be real, the characters are living. She
reproduces the lively mirth and malicious wit of the _andaluz_ peasant,
the gay laughter-loving nature of the Sevillians, with their keen
perception of the false and the ridiculous. She describes a Seville
_patio_ (in “Elia”), or a bull-fight (in “La Gaviota”), or a country
house, _quinta_ (in “Clemencia”), or a deserted convent (in “La
Gaviota”) with a delicate minuteness of detail that brings them vividly
before us. Writing of simple, everyday events, as in the preface she
characterizes those of “Elia,” she paints them with unsurpassed
clearness and vigour, and much of the piquancy and charm, the _sal y
pimienta_, of the South is in her pages. There are in her works some
scenes that in sobriety and psychological skill are worthy of Stendhal.
Her characters are drawn from life with the sure and penetrating
analysis of genius. Perhaps the best example of all is the character of
Marisalada in “La Gaviota,” but the slighter figures, the conservative
General Santa María and the bull-fighter Pepe Vera, in the same novel,
the vivacious, charitable Asistenta in “Elia” (having much in common
with Fernán’s own character), who is unmoved by the discovery of a Roman
epitaph on one of her farms and refuses to believe that there is a land
where bishops marry, Marcial and Jenaro in “Lágrimas”--all these and
many more are sketched with masterly skill. It is when they treat of
country scenes and peasant life that the novels of Fernán Caballero are
at their best, as the first half of “La Gaviota” in the village of
Villamar, or a part of “Clemencia” (1852) in the village of Villa-María.
The character of Don Martín of Villa-María and the scene of his
interview with the importunate Tía Latrana are thoroughly in the manner
of Pereda. So, too, is the wife of the village mayor in “Lágrimas.”
“Haber gastadu mis cuartus” she exclaims--and the use of dialect, so
freely employed by Pereda, is noticeable--“en facere de esse fillu meu
un hulgazán! Non me lo dejú para esu mi tíu Bartulumé, es verdad.” The
foreigners at Seville are portrayed with less sympathy; so we have Sir
John Burnwood, who has come to Seville in order to ride up the Giralda,
and, finding this impossible, proposes to buy the Alcázar, or Sir George
Percy, who is admitted to have noble qualities, but allowed to show
unmistakably bad taste.

Fernán Caballero is not afraid of interrupting her story by digressions,
whether their object be to inculcate virtue, to exalt the Roman Catholic
religion, or to ridicule the importers of foreign fashions and foreign
phrases into Spain. Sometimes, as in “Lágrimas,” this is carried to
excess and rather spoils the effect of the story, but in most of her
works the digressions are never altogether wearisome; the original and
fascinating character that won for Cecilia Böhl von Faber a host of
friends is not often or for long absent from the novels and _relaciones_
of Fernán Caballero. It has been observed that “La Gaviota,” though it
contains scarcely any action, has not a line too much. “No aspiramos á
causar efecto,” says the preface of “La Familia de Albareda,” and it is
this very absence of thrilling action or melodramatic effect that gives
so permanent a charm to Fernán’s works. For a proper appreciation of
Seville and Andalucía they are invaluable: there is not one of them in
which some trait explanatory of the Sevillian and _andaluz_ characters
does not appear. A recent Spanish writer quite unjustly denies that
Fernán Caballero shows any of the _sal andaluza_, and is of opinion that
her work has not left a deep trace in Spanish literature, but must be
considered rather as a preparation for the higher flights of the
novelists who followed. It is difficult to agree with this view. Fernán
Caballero not only hoisted the flag of true Spanish realism, and pointed
to a land of promise, but carved for herself a very real and abiding
empire in this land of her rediscovery.


II.--1870-1900.

In 1864 Pereda published his first work, “Escenas montañesas,” and ten
years later, and three before the death of Fernán Caballero, appeared
Valera’s first novel, “Pepita Jiménez,” and Alarcón’s “El Sombrero de
tres picos.” Since 1874 scarcely a year has passed without producing a
Spanish novel that deserves a high rank in literature. Yet Pereda[100]
did not at once impose himself, and early in 1874 Pérez Galdós could put
the following words into the mouth of one of the characters in _Napoleón
en Chamartín_: “In the matter of novels we are so far astray that, after
producing the source of all the novels of the world, and the most
entertaining book ever written by man, Spain is now unable to compose a
novel of more worth than a grain of mustard seed, and translates these
sentimental French stories.”

Similarly, Señor Menéndez y Pelayo remarks that “about the year 1870,
the date of Pérez Galdós’ first book, the Spanish novel was slumbering
in the arms of insipid or monstrous productions, _entre ñoñerías y
monstruosidades_.” There is little insipidity or sentimentalism in the
more modern Spanish novel. Realism is the dominant note of Spanish
literature. The very atmosphere of Spain makes for clear vision. Its
artists are realistic, even brutally realistic, as Goya occasionally is;
even its mystics have not been wrapped wholly from the world: they do
not live in a cloud, insensible to the real facts of life. And in the
same way the great Spanish novelists are realistic. There is, however, a
true Castilian dignity about their realism. They do not, in George
Meredith’s phrase, mistake the “muddy shallows” for the depths of
Nature. They may treat of the vulgar and the base, but they do not treat
of them in a way that is vulgar and base. They may be as outspoken as
Martial, but their realism is eminently sane and clean.

The modern fashion, strongly in favour of realism, should do justice to
the merits of Spanish novels. It is no doubt guided by the love of
contrast that caused Stendhal, a romantic and an enthusiast at heart, to
read pages of the “Code Civil” before writing his novels, and to adopt a
style mathematically cold and thin, and Flaubert, a poet, to analyse a
subject so vulgar as that of _Madame Bovary_. A simpler age may delight
in works of a fantastic imagination, but a more complex and perhaps
hypocritical age must have truth and away with vagueness and pretence.

Minds so complicated and many-sided as to be rarely themselves, admire
the simple and concrete, and the Spanish genius, which is essentially
objective, answers to this taste both in its literature and in its art.
Yet it is characteristic that in many Spanish novels realism and
mysticism go hand in hand. That peculiarly Spanish mysticism which shows
its false side in Clarín’s “La Regenta,” its practical spirit in Palacio
Valdés’ “Marta y María,” its sadness in Azorín’s “La Voluntad,” is by no
writer more sympathetically treated than by Juan Valera, in “Pepita
Jiménez” and other novels. Valera was too great an artist to belong to
any school. He repeated in many prefaces that his aim was not to
instruct or to edify, but rather to give pleasure. The old heresy that
works of art should edify has had great influence in Spain, and it makes
its presence felt in modern novels with a set purpose, _romans à thèse_.
It cast its shadow over the work of Fernán Caballero and Pereda, and,
passing to the enemy, reappears at intervals in Pérez Galdós and Blasco
Ibáñez. But Valera would have none of it. A novel, he said, “should be
poetry, not history, that is, it should paint things not as they are but
fairer than they are, illuminating them with a light that may cast over
them a certain charm.” The magic of his style, which he caught by his
own confession from the great Spanish mystics of the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, supplied this charm, and is sufficient to make
his work imperishable. It is a charm that is exquisite and escapes
analysis, reminding of that metallic lustre in ancient Spanish
_azulejos_, or glazed tiles, of which modern manufacturers in vain seek
to recapture the secret. Valera was not, in a strict sense, a great
novelist. The construction of his stories is often weak, and the
characters all speak the language of Don Juan Valera. “In Valera,” it
has been said, “there are no Sanchos, all are Valeras.” He was himself
aware of these limitations. He would sometimes say in a preface that he
was not certain if his book were or were not a novel, and as to the
invariably polished speech of his characters, the conversation of the
nurse Antoñona with Luis de Vargas, in “Pepita Jiménez,” is accounted
for by the fact that she had prayed that it might be given her to speak
on this occasion, not in grotesque language, as was her wont, but in
elegant and cultured style. Similarly, Juana la Larga says to her
discreet daughter Juanita, “All that you have said seems to be taken
from the books that Don Pascual gives you to read.”

But Valera could delineate characters skilfully. In his longest novel,
“Las Ilusiones del Doctor Faustino,” the hero, Señor Don Faustino López
y Mendoza, is in some degree a typical figure of modern Spain. Living in
his half ruinous ancestral house in the village of Villabermeja, he
feels himself to be capable of great deeds, but achieves nothing. He
laments not being of humble birth to become a brigand like the great
José María, he laments not having been born in the eleventh or twelfth
century to carve out for himself a kingdom with his sword, and he ends
by obtaining a modest post at Madrid, which brings him little over £100
a year. Valera’s creations have only seemed unreal because, through the
alchemy of his style, he is a King Midas, turning all to gold, and the
excellence of his art raises his figures to the level of statues in
Parian marble. They are not, therefore, less lifelike; because he has an
“exquisite adjustment of word to thought,”[101] it does not follow that
he is “without life and passion”[102]--rather the passion is raised to a
white heat, with the flames no longer visible. And in his descriptions
he is a true realist, giving us the light and laughter of Andalucía. His
“Juanita la Larga” is a charming sketch of life in an Andalusian village
that may recall Alarcón’s “El Sombrero de tres picos.” Some of the most
laughter-rousing scenes of “El Sombrero de tres picos” pass in the
little stone-paved court in front of a flour mill, a quarter of a league
from a certain cathedral town in Andalucía. The court is shaded by a
huge vine-trellis, sufficiently thick and solid for the miller to
sleep--or pretend to sleep--unnoticed among its leaves. It is a brief,
delightful sketch, coloured and malicious, of Andalusian life in the
first years of the nineteenth century. To Andalucía also belong two
novels by Palacio Valdés, “La Hermana San Sulpicio” and “Los Majos de
Cádiz.” But it is Andalucía described not by a native but by a
stranger, for Palacio Valdés is of the North. He has a sense of humour
rather English than Spanish, and he is, indeed, almost as well known out
of Spain as within the Peninsula. It is a humour less bitter and
aggressive than that of another Asturian, Leopoldo Alas, with whom
Valdés collaborated in a volume of critical essays. As a sketcher of
character, Valdés is admirable. Gloria, the typically Andalusian girl,
and the Gallegan Sanjurjo are both excellently drawn in “La Hermana San
Sulpicio.” The scene of his “Marta y María” is laid in an old town of
Astúrias--the author is now in his native country--surrounded by a wide
level of meadows and gently sloping hills to the _ría_, bordered by
immense pine woods and the sea. It is a novel even more delightful than
“La Hermana San Sulpicio.” The scene of “La Aldea perdida” is also
Astúrias. It is a pastoral symphony, an Asturian counterpart to Pereda’s
“El Sabor de la Tierruca,” a charming story--in spite of its theatrical
ending--of village rivalries and reconciliations in a land wooded with
chestnuts and oaks and cider-apples, a land of maize and cool green
fields of trefoil, and mountain paths hedged with honeysuckle. But in
other works Palacio Veldés has not maintained this Spanish inspiration.
In “La Espuma,” “Maximina,” “La Fe,” the influence is that of the French
naturalistic School. _Clarín_ (Leopoldo Alas), though born at Zamora
also an Asturian, was likewise deeply influenced by France in his long
work “La Regenta.” In one of his critical essays _Clarín_ wrote that
“Spanish realism is very Spanish; it is in the race. But it has its
defects, _no todo en él es flores_; it is deficient in psychology and
the poetry of passion.” In “La Regenta” we have passion and
psychological analysis and epigrammatic wit. The scene is the old
cathedral city of Vetusta (or rather Oviedo). The treatment is not
characteristically Spanish. Vetusta is here a typical provincial town,
such as Flaubert might have described and hated, and its inhabitants are
almost all represented as ignorant, vulgar, or vicious. Their stupidity
and vulgarity are lashed with an ingenious subtlety that is unsparing,
and the motives guiding their actions are laid bare with an amazing
skill. _Clarín’s_ humour is often a little cruel, and the novel is
crowded with terse and biting phrases. One of the readers of the Vetusta
_casino_--the worthiest of them, _Clarín_ is careful to assure us--is
thus pilloried in a few lines: “He arrived at nine o’clock every evening
without fail, took _Le Figaro_ and _The Times_, which he placed over _Le
Figaro_, put on his gold spectacles, and, lulled by the sound of the
gas, fell gently asleep over the foremost paper of the world, a
privilege which no one sought to dispute. Shortly after his death of
apoplexy, over _The Times_, it was discovered that he knew no English.”

The most prominent figure among living Spanish novelists is undoubtedly
Don Benito Pérez Galdós. In his “Episodios Nacionales,” the troubled
history of Spain in the nineteenth century, from the wars against
Napoleon to the death of Prim, passes before us in a Spanish human
comedy. We see the noble death of Churruca in the battle of Trafalgar,
we witness the brief, feverish defence of Madrid before Napoleon, the
heroic sieges of Zaragoza and Gerona, the stubborn resistance of Bilbao
to the troops of Zumalacárregui in the first Carlist war; later we see
Isabel II. silently crossing the French frontier at Irun, the effect of
Castelar’s eloquence in the Cortes, Prim landing at Cadiz--these and a
hundred more principal actors and events are marshalled in a succession
of novels now numbering over forty. Pérez Galdós continues to write with
undiminished vigour. The forty-second episode, “España Trágica” (1909),
pictures Madrid opinion in street and _café_ during the year 1870, when
Spain was “in high fever,” choosing a king. The book ends with a vivid
account of the assassination of Prim. His long and difficult task was
crowned with success, but his presence was needed now more than ever to
check the hostility of the federalists on the one hand, of the
aristocracy on the other. It was the 27th December, 1870, and on the
following day he was to travel to Cartagena in order to receive the Duke
of Aosta. He had just left the Congreso. The night was bitterly cold and
the carriage rolled silently through the snow in almost deserted
streets. It was noticed that first one man and then a second stopped in
the street to light a cigar. This was apparently a signal. A little
further on, in the _Calle del Turco_, a carriage blocked the way, and
almost immediately the windows of Prim’s carriage crashed in on both
sides and he fell back, wounded by more than one bullet. The
forty-third Episode, “Amadeo I.” (1910), describes the reign of the
Italian prince which began thus tragically with the murder of Prim,
continued for two years in a tragi-comedy, and ended with the dignified
withdrawal of the loyal and disinterested “rey caballero,” who had been
wilfully and persistently misunderstood and slighted by the subjects who
had invited him to reign over them. With the Queen and their three
children, including the infant Duke of the Abruzzi, he descended the
steps of the _Palacio del Oriente_ for the last time “entre alabarderos
rígidos, sin música ni voces que turbaran el fúnebre silencio. Sólo el
rumor de las pisadas marcaba el lento caminar de una época” (February,
1873). With this and a volume on the first Spanish Republic,[103] the
fifth and final series of the Episodes marches rapidly towards
completion. For forty years novels and plays from Pérez Galdós’ pen have
appeared at the rate of two or more a year, and some of the novels are
of considerable length--“Fortunata y Jacinta” has something like two
thousand pages. Well-drawn characters and skilfully reconstructed scenes
abound, but a weariness sometimes overcomes the reader. For these novels
scarcely seem to have an end or a beginning; there is no plot or
concentration of interest. Perhaps for this very reason they are an
extremely faithful presentation of life. No one would dispute Pérez
Galdós’ great talent as a writer, but his admirers may regret that he
does not pause to draw more complete pictures with finished art. In his
anti-clerical novel, “Doña Perfecta,” Don Inocencio represents the
influence of the priest in the family. Doña Perfecta, in league with the
priest, secretly sets the whole force of her wealth and power in
mediæval Orbajosa in the scale against her nephew, Pepe, who wishes to
marry her only child, Rosario. Pepe is looked upon in Orbajosa as an
atheist and _hors la loi_, although he is merely a modern man of
science. There is no acknowledged opposition: Doña Perfecta meets him
invariably with a pleasant smile; but his letters are opened and
confiscated, he finds a spirit of steady though veiled hostility in Doña
Perfecta’s house and in Orbajosa, he is assured that Rosario does not
love him, and he cannot convince or overcome insidious enemies who never
come into the open. Finally, Doña Perfecta becomes the murderess of her
nephew, though in such a way that her conscience is entirely free from
sense of guilt. The end justifies the means. The character of Doña
Perfecta is developed with consummate skill; Palacio Valdés thirteen
years later drew a slighter sketch on the same lines--Doña Tula,
Gloria’s mother (in “La Hermana San Sulpicio,” 1889). No doubt there are
towns in Spain such as Orbajosa, where the spirit of the Church is
bigoted and Jesuitical, opposed to all progress; or such as Nieva, in
“Marta y María,” where the people consider María to be a saint who can
work miracles, and bring children for her to cure them with a look, and
her confessor encourages the belief; or such as Vetusta, in “La
Regenta,” where Don Fermín combines a high position in the Chapter of
the Cathedral with a steady traffic in Church furniture and ornaments.
Yet one may sometimes wonder whether the anti-Clericals are not too
inclined to attribute all the ills of Spain to the influence of the
priests. “Valgame Dios y qué vida nos hemos de dar, Sancho amigo,” they
seem to say, as if the dissolution of the religious orders and the
separation of Church and State would at once spell prosperity in Spain.
The religious communities are numerous and rich; beggars, as at
Orbajosa, are also numerous (and occasionally rich), but it would be
unfair to lay the blame of poverty and backwardness entirely on the
Church. There are many other causes, one of them the dissipated,
careless life of society in the large towns, sketched by el padre Luis
Coloma in his novel “Pequeñeces,” and by Pérez Galdós himself in “El
Caballero Encantado.”


III.--IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY.

The novel continues to hold the field in Spanish literature. The early
years of the twentieth century saw the death of two splendid writers,
Valera (1824-1905), and Pereda (1833-1906), and Leopoldo Alas died in
1901. Of the older novelists, Pérez Galdós, the Condesa Pardo
Bazán,[104] Palacio Valdés, and Jacinto Octavio Picón[105] still remain,
and a brilliant group of younger writers is ready to pass on the torch
undimmed. Pérez Galdós’ “El Caballero Encantado” is dated July-December,
1909. Writing immediately after the Barcelona riots, it was natural that
the condition and future of Spain should be in his thoughts, and an
allegorical figure representing Spain or the spirit of the race plays a
prominent part in the book. The novel has, indeed, a little too much of
the marvellous and the symbolical, and when the hero by a last
transformation becomes a fish in the river Tagus, we are uncomfortably
reminded of the spurious and fantastical continuation of _Lazarillo de
Tormes_, in which Lázaro is transformed into a tunny-fish. The reason
given by Señor Pérez Galdós is, however, excellent: “To this sad
dwelling (the silent depths of the Tagus) come those who by their
loquacity have drowned the will and thought of Spanish life in an ocean
of words. Nearly all those here present are orators. They spoke much,
and did nothing. Some of them are masters of high-sounding phrases,
conjurers who, by the magic of their art and the vanity of their
rhetoric, transformed the tower of eloquence into a tower of Babel.” The
theme of the book is that Don Carlos de Tarsis, the young Marqués de
Mudarra, deputy for a district of the geographical existence of which he
has but a vague idea, who lives at Madrid, and spends with both hands
the money drained from his estates, is magically changed into a
farm-labourer on his land, or rather, on the land that was his, and now
belongs in part to his agent, in part to his usurer. For to meet the
expenses of his idle and dissipated life he must have money at any cost;
but when the rents of his tenants are raised they emigrate, and his
agent, who attributes the backwardness of agriculture in Spain to the
fact that “the great land-owners live far from their estates as though
they were ashamed of them,” supplies him with ever-diminishing sums,
till he is reduced to penury and usurers. Tarsis recognizes that he is a
most unworthy acolyte of Idleness, and that his only merit is “the
brutal sincerity of his pessimism,” but he “would rather die than work.”
So far the character is drawn from life, and it is only in the
vagueness of the subsequent enchantments that the effect of the novel
becomes veiled and uncertain. From a farm-labourer he successively
becomes shepherd, quarryman, tramp, and criminal--all with much needless
magic--till, by the final ordeal of silence in the golden Tagus, he is
restored to his original being as Marqués de Mudarra, a chastened and a
wiser marquis. Stress is laid on the miserable state of the poor,
compared with the immunity of the rich. Famishing men are dragged off to
prison for rooting up onions on a rich man’s estate, and shot down by
the Guardia Civil when they try to escape--the official report runs:
“the prisoners attempted to escape, and were overtaken by an accident
from which a natural death ensued.” There is perhaps a greater air of
reality about the account of the rich _Caciques_, owners of vast estates
or _latifundios_, who pay to the Treasury but a tenth part of the proper
land-tax, who falsify returns at elections, protect criminals, and
assault honest folk, while the judges are their creatures. This
_Caciquismo_ is part of the deplorable administration of Spain. Señor
Pérez Galdós who, as a native of the Canary Islands, has the double
advantage of looking at Spain as it were from within and from without,
returns to the question of words and deeds, the wealth of words and the
scantiness of action, with an insistence which must be excessively
annoying to a Spanish reader. Yet he does not despair of Spain’s future.
He sees hope in the proved vitality of the race, in its quick recoveries
after misfortune, its heroism even under self-inflicted sufferings:
“The ineffable follies of my sons have plunged me (_i.e._ Spain) in
despair, and in the darkness of despair my death has seemed certain and
inevitable. And then in some terrible crisis that appeared to ensure my
destruction, I have revived when they were carrying me from the
death-bed to the grave.”

The best work of Pereda was of the Mountain, Valera and Fernán Caballero
write of Andalucía, Palacio Valdés of Astúrias, and similarly the
Gallegans, Valle-Inclán and Señora Pardo Bazán have found their best
inspiration in Galicia, and Vicente Blasco Ibáñez in his native
Valencia. Valencia is a fertile land of fierce heat and dazzling
light--the light so wonderfully reflected in the work of the Valencian
painter Joaquín Sorolla. Blasco Ibánez has written some striking novels
that have no connection with Valencia, but his best and most delightful
work is steeped in the life of the immense Valencian plain (in “La
Barraca,” an intense story of a boycott of the Huerta); of the city of
Valencia (in “Arroz y Tartana”); of the rice-growing, fever-stricken
marshes of the Albufera, famous for its fishing and shooting, near
Valencia (“Cañas y Barro”); of the fishermen and smugglers of El Grao
and the Valencian coastline (“Flor de Mayo”); of love among the oranges
in the orchard of Spain (“Entre Naranjos”). Blasco Ibáñez excels in
portraying the lives and thoughts and struggles of the simple fisherman
and peasant--hardworking as Batiste, or magnificently idle as Pimentó;
and in describing popular customs and traditions,--a simple procession
in floodtime (as in “Entre Naranjos”) or the dances and _festeigs_,
courtings, of the _atlóts_ and _atlotas_ of Ibiza (in “Los Muertos
mandan”). The hero of “Los Muertos mandan” (1909), Don Jaime or Chaume,
is not a peasant, but a member of an ancient family of Mallorcan nobles,
hemmed in by tradition and inherited instincts. The background, however,
of descriptions of Mallorca and lawless peasant life in Ibiza, with its
woods and orchards and white farms girt by a green transparent sea,
contribute more powerfully to the charm of the book than the wrestling
of Don Jaime against the clinging influence of the innumerable dead, who
still prevail. But, indeed, Blasco Ibáñez’ presentation of any strenuous
life-struggle is forcible and imposing. It reflects his own personality.
His creed is one of restless striving and discontent with the apathy too
frequent in Spain. His activity is immense: though little over forty
years of age, his novels are already many in number, short stories and
articles are continually appearing from his pen, he lectures, travels,
translates, publishes, controls a Valencian paper, _El Pueblo_, and till
the autumn of 1908 represented Valencia in Parliament as a Republican;
now his energies are occupied in founding two towns--to be called New
Valencia and Cervantes--for colonies of Valencians in the Argentine.

Blasco Ibáñez once wrote a long novel of the French Revolution, “Viva la
República!” and in his ideas and in his art the influence of France has,
no doubt, been very strong. His ideas sometimes trespass on his art, as
in “La Catedral,” where, in the person of Gabriel Luna, he declaims
tediously and without mercy. His novels, as a rule, show an admirable
unity. In each of his heroes we see Blasco Ibáñez: but Blasco Ibáñez
entirely identified with the peasant Batiste (in “La Barraca”), or the
painter Renovales (in “La Maja Desnuda”), or the Socialist Luna (in “La
Catedral”), or the bull-fighter Gallardo (in “Sangre y Arena”). His very
manner catches the atmosphere and colour of the surroundings he
describes. He becomes vulgar in the descriptions of commercial, crowded
Valencia, wearisome in details of the feasts of its _bourgeois_ and the
various foods of its market-place (in “Arroz y Tartana”); he can be
magnificently simple, with the soul of a peasant or a fisherman (in “La
Barraca” and “Flor de Mayo”), and the fertile Huerta gives free scope to
his luxuriant art, his overflow of poetry and imagination. This power of
concentration, which Blasco Ibáñez possesses in so high a degree, is
rare in Spanish literature. The heroes of Blasco Ibáñez’ novels are men
strong to labour, persistent before defeat. They are almost always
defeated and die, Gallardo in the arena, Luna assassinated in Toledo
Cathedral, the Pascuals, fishermen of three generations, drowned in
storms off the Valencian coast. But the dominant note of his novels is
still “E pur si muove,” and in spirit his heroes are as unconquerable as
Don Quixote. He has Zola’s power of describing crowds; in “La Horda”
appears the multitude of hucksters and street-sellers that haunt the
Madrid _Rastro_; and similarly the background of “Luna Benamor” (1909)
is formed by a vivid description of Gibraltar, with its motley crowd of
Spaniards and Jews and Moors and Englishmen. His prose is suited to
these descriptions; it is living, coloured, tumultuous, sometimes
hurried and careless--a Spanish critic speaks of his _barbarismos
gramaticales_. From so voluminous and passionate a writer we should
expect nothing of the polished or the exquisite, his work is in the
rough; in a sense its incorrect ardour is Spanish, but its persistent
energy is a refreshing note in Spain, and may well cover an occasional
fault of taste or an ungrammatical sentence here and there. His works
are nearly always striking and original, however hurried may have been
their composition.

It has been remarked that the younger Spanish novelists are rather
thinkers than artists, and Pío Baroja, Martínez Ruiz (_Azorín_) and
Valle-Inclán have introduced an almost alien note into Spanish
literature. It is significant that two at least of these writers,
_Azorín_ and Pío Baroja, are keen admirers of the essentially
intellectual art of El Greco: Theotocopuli has cast over them the spell
of his ascetically thin figures and cold attenuated tints. Pío Baroja is
almost Russian in his pitilessly accurate descriptions, in his rebellion
against the facts of life and his championship of the
persecuted--outcasts, criminals, and vagabonds. In “La Ciudad de la
Niebla” (1909), “The City of Fog,” he brings his clear, almost
photographic, vision to bear on London, and chiefly on the dingier
districts, Bloomsbury, Covent Garden, the squalid labyrinth of streets
off Shaftesbury Avenue, the Docks, the Embankment. Similarly in “César
ó Nada” (1910) he continues to write in a spirit of mocking reckless
individualism. The narrative is but a slender thread to string together
his observations of men and places.[106] _Azorín_, again, is not
concerned with the form of his novels. He is a thinker, a psychological
analyst, who deliberately disregards construction. Yuste, in “La
Voluntad,” voices the author’s opinions; “Particularly,” he says, “the
novel must have no plot; life itself has no plot: it is varied,
many-sided, floating, contradictory--everything except symmetrical,
geometrical, rigid, as it appears in novels.” The novel must give
fragments, separate sensations. In “Las Confesiones de un pequeño
filósofo” _Azorín_ gives us his original impressions, his fragmentary
sensations of “figures et choses qui passaient” in a style full of
poetry and charm. His “La Voluntad” is a book very modern in its
restless thought and individualistic philosophy. It has that originality
of which Yuste, the philosopher of the book, speaks as consisting in
“something undefinable, a secret fascination of thought, a mysterious
suggestiveness of ideas.” The rare charm of _Azorín’s_ style and his
skill in descriptions, _emoción del paisaje, imaginatio locorum_, clothe
with serenity his “obstinate questionings of sense and outward things,”
and with peace his purely intellectual spirit and disquieting irony.
With Ramón del Valle-Inclán, again, construction and plot are secondary.
The action is slightly sketched in his novels, but incidents and persons
are thrown into high relief by the delicate and original character of
his style. It is a style built up of all that is rare and exquisite,
with a sobriety that chisels a finished picture in a single phrase. In
“El Resplandor de la Hoguera,” for instance, a green path leading from a
small Basque village to its cemetery is simply described as “todo en paz
de oratión,” and such lonely word pictures abound in his writings. His
latest work, a trilogy, is “La Guerra Carlista,” and the action of the
first part, “Los Cruzados de la Causa” (1908), passes in a village of
Galicia. The haughty, great-hearted Gallegan _hidalgo_ Don Juan Manuel,
perhaps the best of Valle-Inclán’s vivid character-sketches, appears in
this as in many others of his novels. The second part, “El Resplandor de
la Hoguera” (1909), follows the broken movements of the guerilla
fighting in the intricate Basque country; and the third part (each part
forming, however, a separate novel), “Gerifaltes de Antaño” (1909),
describes the furtive but daring tactics of that sinister Carlist
_cabecilla_, Manuel Santa Cruz, priest of Hernialde, leading his men at
night, “swift and silent as a wolf,” by labyrinthine mountain paths,
past maize-fields and chestnut-trees and vineyards, and scented meadows
under the stars, or ordering execution after execution of men and women
“with a mystical coldness and internal peace.” His cruelty was that of
the peasant who lights a fire to destroy the plagues of his vineyard. He
watched the smoke go up as an evening sacrifice--

“Lo que á unos encendía en amor, á los otros los encendía en odio, y el
cabecilla pasaba entre el incendio y el saqueo, anhelando el amanecer de
paz para aquellas aldeas húmedas y verdes, que regulaban su vida por la
voz de las campanas, al ir al campo, al yantar, al cubrir el fuego de
ceniza y llevar á los pesebres el recado de yerba. Era su crueldad como
la del viñador que enciende hogueras contra las plagas de su viña.
Miraba subir el humo como en un sacrificio, con la serena esperanza de
hacer la vendimia en un día del Señor, bajo el oro del sol y la voz de
aquellas campanas de cobre antiguo, bien tañidas.”

It is difficult to analyse the fascination of these novels. Their
incidents seem trivial enough and the characters speak in thin, broken
sentences; but the effect is a marvellously vivid picture of the
flickering scenes of the last Carlist war and the hill tactics of the
_cabecillas_. The thin lines are due not to any poverty of inspiration
but to the restraint of a consummate artist. The most recent Spanish
novelist of note is Ricardo León, a young writer from Málaga, whose
first novel, “Casta de Hidalgos,” was published in the autumn of 1908,
followed by “Comedia Sentimental” in 1909, and “Alcalá de los Zegríes,”
“La Escuela de los Sofistas” (a volume of dialogues), and “El Amor de
los Amores” in 1910. These books are the work of a writer who has read
and assimilated the best of Spanish literature from its earliest
beginnings, chronicles, legends, _serranillas_, fervent religious
treatises. His style is, indeed, not unworthy of the Spanish mystics. It
has at once richness and sobriety, it is steeped in archaic humanism,
but tinged with modern sadness and disillusion; it is, as the author
might himself call it, “un castellano de clásico sabor.” It has in it
nothing strained or artificial, being, rather, the flowing expression of
a mystical intensity. He gives admirable pictures of the thoughts and
lives of old-fashioned proud _hidalgos_, “after the pattern of the
ancient _hidalgos_ of Castille,” such as Don Juan Manuel, who lives in
ruinous Santillana with its sadness of centuries, _tristeza milenaria_,
in “Casta de Hidalgos;” or of serious, reserved philosophers, such as
Don Juan Antonio in “Comedia Sentimental.” “Alcalá de los Zegríes”
contains many passages of noble Spanish prose, and others of
psychological interest; but it is for the most part concerned with
politics and party strife. The Spaniards, as a rule, are more interested
in politics than in literature. Valera’s celebrated “Pepita Jiménez”
brought him no more than eight thousand _reales_, or under £80, and
Señor Unamuno, the Rector of Salamanca University, a prominent Spanish
thinker and writer, has declared that literary opinion in Spain is
formed by some five hundred persons, “quinientas personas mal
contadas.” The novelists may protest, but the novel gains. There is no
temptation to write in order to please the taste of a public which does
not exist. If there is something commercial in the methodical output of
Pérez Galdós’ or Blasco Ibáñez’ novels, commercialism has certainly,
hitherto, had but little part in Spanish literature. Limited, unliterary
Spain has had this advantage. The world’s debate has not vulgarized it;
a half-culture has not dragged down the novel to flamboyant,
self-advertising methods. The novel in Spain is at its best when it
rejects, or has not come into contact with, foreign influences. It can
be realistic without thought of this or that school. It fascinates by
its original flavour and scent of the soil.




XX

NOVELS OF GALICIA


The inhabitants of Galicia have been held to be the Boeotians of Spain,
yet the fact that in the political world many eminent persons are
Gallegans seems to show that Galicia has been maligned. To Galicia, too,
belong two gifted modern writers, the Condesa Emilia Pardo Bazán and Don
Ramón del Valle-Inclán. Señora Pardo Bazán belongs to the older group of
Spanish novelists; born in 1851,[107] she published her two well-known
novels of Galicia, “Los Pazos de Ulloa,” and “La Madre Naturaleza,” in
1886 and 1887, and “De mi tierra,” a book of scenes and essays of
Galicia, in 1888. It is as a regional novelist that Señora Pardo Bazán
has won her most glorious laurels. “Galicienne ella adore les choses de
la Galice,” says M. Vézinet,[108] and he adds that she develops the same
subjects as French naturalists, but avoids the licentiousness of which
they are so fond. The multitude of her tasks and interests has
necessarily hampered her art as a novelist. “She has unfortunately
diffused her energies in all directions,” says Mr. Fitzmaurice-Kelly.
“No one can succeed in everything--as a poet, a romancer, an essayist, a
critic, a lecturer, and a politician. Yet the Condesa Pardo Bazán is all
this, and more. We would gladly exchange all her miscellaneous writings
for another novel like ‘Los Pazos de Ulloa.’”[109]

“Los Pazos de Ulloa” is a novel impregnated with the atmosphere of
Galicia. Los Pazos is a large country-house in a remote valley of maize
and vines and chestnuts, reached on horseback through a desolate
wolf-country, _país de lobos_. Its furniture is rickety, its
window-frames have no glass, though it is not so ruinous as Los Pazos de
Limioso some leagues away, which lacks even window-frames. The village
priest of Ulloa has but two devotions, those of the _jarro_ and the
_escopeta_, the wine-jar and the gun; the drinking of water and the use
of soap he holds alike to be effeminate. The Marqués de Ulloa, too,
frank, noble at heart, but cynical, often brutal, spends much of his
time at village fairs, and shooting partridges in the maize or among
pines and scented hill-plants. He is totally in the power of his servant
Primitivo, who manages his estates. Primitivo, too, holds the peasants,
as he says, in the palm of his hand. They are patient workers who,
however, in the opinion of the Marqués de Ulloa, need a strong hand to
control them--some one like Primitivo _que les dé ciento de ventaja en
picardía_, that is, who will know two tricks to their one. When the
Marqués disburdens himself to the new chaplain, Don Julián, in the wild
neglected garden, on the subject of Primitivo, he becomes aware by a
rustling in the undergrowth that Primitivo has been listening to the
outburst. When, as a first step to freedom, he determines to leave Los
Pazos on a visit to his uncle at Santiago de Compostella, Primitivo
makes no open opposition, but the mare is unshod, the donkey has been
mysteriously wounded. The Marqués and Julián determine to go on foot to
Cebre, where they will take the diligence. The path grows wilder, the
woods close in more thickly, a cross shows where a man has been killed,
there is no sound but that of the woodcutters among the chestnuts. The
Marqués, keenly alert, sees the glint of a gun’s barrel in the brushwood
pointing at the chaplain, who is held to be the instigator of this
rebellion. It is Primitivo “out shooting.” The book is a gloomy picture
of a rich country ruined by mismanagement, underhand dealing, and
ignorance. The Marqués de Ulloa’s agent has the peasants so completely
in his power that he is able to turn the scale of an election. He began
by methodically robbing his master in the administration of his estate,
and the money so obtained he lends to the peasants, who are driven to
borrow that they may be able to continue to work their land. Primitivo
charges an interest of eight per cent. (per month), and in years of
famine he raises the interest. The country and its inhabitants are
described with a master-hand. Don Ramón del Valle-Inclán is one of the
new school of Spanish novelists, and properly belongs to the twentieth
century. He is above all things a stylist. In his _sutiles prosas_ there
is an exquisite restraint, with here and there a tinge of archaism and a
haunting music of soft languid cadences. He loves the rare, the
delicate, the costly, and his art is to write of luxury in sober
phrases, instinct with sadness and the magic of regret. It is a style of
silk and cut crystal, as of silver-work or polished ivory handled by
thin ascetic fingers. In his four “Sonatas” (Spring, Summer, Autumn, and
Winter) we have the memoirs of the Marqués de Bradomín, the
recollections of his former loves. The scene of “Sonata de Primavera” is
an Italian palazzo with the lilacs in flower along its terraces and
roses filling the garden between the cypresses, while the scene of
“Sonata de Estío” is Mexico in all the luxurious growth of its summer
vegetation. In the “Sonata de Invierno” the scene is the Carlist Court
at Estella and the setting is more gloomy. The Marquis loses an arm in
the service of King Charles VII., and from the window of his sick-room
at Villareal de Navarra looks out on a road lined with leafless poplars
and mountains flecked with snow. But these novels do not equal “Sonata
de Otoño,” the scene of which is in Señor Valle-Inclán’s native Galicia.
Two lines of Verlaine in some way describe the novel:--

    “Dans le vieux parc solitaire et glacé
     Deux spectres ont évoqué le passé.”

It is a book that may be read in little more than an hour, yet it has
many arresting pages. A few short sentences, words thrown here and there
at random with concealed art, give a wonderfully clear picture of green,
rainy Galicia, with its hills and streams. We see the hills and more
hills veiled in mist, the flocks of white and black sheep, the mills,
the white smoke rising from the houses among the fig-trees, the distant
blue mountains tipped with the first snows, a flight of doves against
green fields above the tower of a _Pazo_, a stony bridle-path with its
bramble hedges and great pools of water at which oxen drink, the
peasants arriving to pay their tribute of corn at the Palacio, the
shepherds coming down from the hills wearing their capes of reeds. Women
return singing from the fountain, an old man drives on his cows as they
stop to graze, a half-witted woman gathers scented herbs and simples
that have mickle grace to “give health to the soul and cure the ills of
the herd.” And there is the Palacio de Bradomín, with its flight of wide
granite steps; a path leads to it through the green, drenched
countryside, and the autumn sun lights up its windows among tall
chestnut-trees. A fountain trickles and birds sing in the old garden of
myrtle, cedar, and cypress, still in late autumn brimmed with roses,
though “the paths were covered with dry and yellow leaves that the wind
swept with a slow rustling; the snails, motionless _como viejos
paralíticos_, as old paralytics, were taking the sun on the seats of
stone.” The passages of the Palacio are long and gloomy, and cold
strikes through the large silent rooms, so that in all of them logs of
wood burn brightly, stirred with tongs of “ancient bronze, elaborately
worked.” The bare branches of the trees graze the windows of the
library, where, among the parchment bindings, reigns a monastic peace,
_un sueño canónico y doctoral_.

It is in a minute chiselling of details that lies Señor Valle-Inclán’s
strength. The snails in the garden, the shape of the glasses, the silver
chains of a hanging-lamp--nothing is passed over as insignificant. But
the details are given in few words, with the clear precision of a
skilled craftsman. And he has the power to set his characters in strong
relief. Thus in “Sonata de Otoño” we have that _muy gran señor_ Don Juan
Manuel, who on his first appearance hurries away “to Villa del Prior, to
thrash a clerk.” It is his custom to ride over from his country-house,
his _Pazo_, two leagues away, tie his horse to the Palacio garden-gate,
enter and call to a servant for wine--for that excellent _vino de la
Fontela_ which would be the best in the world, he says, if pressed from
selected grapes--drink and fall asleep, and then waking up call loudly
for his horse, whether it chances to be night or day, and ride back to
his _Pazo_. There is a glimpse of the mother of Concha, who would tell
the children stories of the saints, and with “mystic, noble fingers”
slowly turn the pages to show them the pictures of the Christian Year;
of the mother of Xavier, who would pass her days in the recess of a
wide balcony spinning for her servants, in a chair of crimson velvet
studded with silver nails. There is thin, white Concha, so saintly and
so frail; there is Xavier, Marqués de Bradomín, himself, the gallant,
cynical sceptic; there is the page Florisel, the old servant Candelaria,
with their rare and far-sought names.

In “Flor de Santidad,” perhaps the best of Señor Valle-Inclán’s books,
we have the same delicate descriptions of Galicia--the sinister inn,
solitary in a gloomy brown Sierra; the shepherdess, keeping her flock
and seeing mystic visions among the Celtic stones, yellowed with ancient
lichens, _líquenes milenarios_; the simple greeting of the peasants:
_Alabado sea Dios_, “Glory be to God”; pilgrims and witches; charms and
magical incantations to preserve the flocks from evil; cunning and
simplicity, superstition and crime. The same charm of mystical
simplicity and innocence that surrounds Adega, the girl shepherdess of
“Flor de Santidad,” surrounds all the heroines of Señor Valle-Inclán’s
novels; Maximina, for instance, of the sorrowful, velvet eyes, _ojos
aterciopelados y tristes_, in “Sonata de Invierno.” It is in “Flor de
Santidad” that occurs the picture, repeated in “Jardín Novelesco,” of
the old peasant woman going with her little grandson to find him a
master. They meet the Archpriest of Lestrove, who is riding
leisurely--_de andadura mansa y doctoral_--to preach at a village
festival. “May God give us a holy and good day.” The Archpriest draws in
his mare. “Are you going to the fair?” he asks. “The poor have nothing
to do at the fair. We are going to look for a master for the boy.” “And
does he know his catechism?” “Yes, Señor, he knows it. Poverty does not
prevent from being a Christian.” The grandmother leaves the
nine-year-old child in the service of a blind beggar. “To be the servant
of a blind man is a position many would like to have,” says the beggar,
and the new _Lazarillo_ answers sorrowfully, “Sí, Señor, sí.” As she
watches them go slowly away along the road through the wet green
country, she murmurs, drying her tears: “Nine years old and already
earning the bread he eats. Glory be to God.”

Incidents and characters are thrown into the relief given by the
peculiar and original magic of Señor Valle-Inclán’s delicately chiselled
prose. There is in this prose something icily fresh, something of lilacs
and hydrangeas, vague reminiscences of the silver tinkling of voices in
a glass-roofed market, or of the swish of a scythe in wet grass. The
words are cunningly weighed and chosen and set as _gouttes d’argent
d’orfévrerie_. And the transparent freshness of his style is admirably
suited to describe the primitive simplicity and freshness of Galicia.




XXI

NOVELS OF THE MOUNTAIN


I.--“SAVOUR OF THE SOIL”

Fifty years ago, before Zola and the naturalistic school were on the
lips of men, a Spanish novelist, José María de Pereda, was beginning to
write who can only not be called a naturalist, because of the
associations given to the name in France. Humour and frankness run
through Spanish literature; there is less artificial refinement and more
vigour and broadly human sympathy than in the literature of France. The
very language is frank and outspoken rather than subtle and insinuating.
And the nobly independent character of Spaniards of all classes counts
for much in the admirable sanity of Spanish realism. “Our lowest social
strata,” says the Condesa Pardo Bazán, “differ not a little from those
described by Zola and the Goncourts.” The Spanish realist has thus no
cause to dissect common people and vulgar events from a superior point
of view, putting on gloves, as it were, to keep his hands clean. He
knows that virtue perches in strange places and learns to see _le
sublime d’en bas_, and there is a wide gulf between French naturalism
and Spanish realism. Pereda,[110] a _hidalgo_ of the old school, born at
Santander on the 6th of February, 1833, spent the greater part of his
life in the _Montaña_, at Santander, or at his country estate of
Polanco, only leaving Cantabria to study for a few years at Madrid, and
later to sit for a few months in the Cortes as a Carlist. The rest of
his life he passed among his family and books and friends in his beloved
_Montaña_.[111] His friend in private life, Señor Pérez Galdós,
describes him as dark, sunburnt, of medium height, with moustache and
pointed beard, of a character fundamentally Spanish, and of very nervous
temperament, with a horror of conventionality and pretence. It was about
the year 1859 that custom and character sketches from Pereda’s pen began
to appear in a Santander paper, _La Abeja Montañesa_. They were
collected in 1864, and published under the title of “Escenas
montañesas.” “Escenas montañesas” gives the essence of Pereda’s art,
and, though he later wrote long novels and occasionally attained an
admirable unity of treatment, the delight is still in the descriptions
of fast-vanishing customs and in the characters of his peasants and
fishermen rather than in the thread of the action, which is generally
slight; and the strength of his novels lies not in their heroes and
heroines but in the secondary figures and the side-shows. “Escenas
montañesas” shows us life in Santander and the neighbouring
mountain-country as it was half a century ago, and as it now lives
permanently in Pereda’s art. Scenes and people are presented to us with
extraordinary vividness, and only now and then the sketches read almost
too much like observations taken directly from the note-book. We have
the picaresque sketch of the _raquero_, the Santander _gamin_ who lives
by petty larceny from ships along the quays; the old-fashioned household
in a mountain village--by a hereditary privilege Saint John is looked
upon as one of the family, and the Saint’s procession raiment figures in
the washing list; the wake at a village funeral, with the frequent
toast, “to the glory of the dead,” _á la buena gloria del defunto_; tía
Nisca, going her long homeward journey on foot after bidding farewell to
her son on a ship bound for “the Indies,” and reproaching the unfertile
soil that causes its sons to emigrate, though there is a song that men
who go to the Indies in order to get rich would find the Indies at home,
were they but willing to work:--

    “A las Indias van los hombres
     A las Indias por ganar,
     Las Indias aquí las tienen
     Si quisieran trabajar;”

and especially the noble figure of tío Tremontorio (the first and
foremost of Pereda’s long line of masterly portraits in humble life, and
the last of that race of hardy fishermen who, with the Basques, rivalled
English whalers in the North Seas and made treaties with English kings
during the Middle Ages), net-making, or eating his bread and raw
_bacalao_ on his balcony in the squalid _Calle Alta_, or consoling the
wives and mothers of fishermen on the _Muelle Anaos_ (in “La Leva”), and
dying cheerfully (in “El fin de una raza”), after many hours of battling
with the waves, glad to die quietly in his house, although he had nearly
perished in the storm owing to his unwillingness to lose an
_escapulario_ of the _Vírgen del Carmen_. “We are all sailors of that
further sea,” he says, in his rough language, as he lies dying, “all
bound for the same port. If the devil does not block it against us, I
to-morrow and you another day will cast anchor there.” “Suum cuique” is
the longest and not the least excellent of these _Escenas_. A poor
_hidalgo_ of the mountain, Don Silvestre Seturas, visits a powerful
friend at Madrid, and is speedily disillusioned of the capital and only
court. His friend in turn accompanies him to his ancestral
country-house, and is delighted at first with the country and its
idyllic peace. But the _rat de ville_ begins to discover, after some
months, that the country has neither peace nor poetry--“Barbarus híc ego
sum quia non intelligor ulli”--and returns to Madrid. Several incidents
contribute to his change of opinion, incidents which reveal the
character of the peasants and illustrate the fact that Pereda, while he
makes us love the peasants of the _Montaña_, is never blind to their
faults and weaknesses. The rich _madrileño_ had decided to give a clock
for the tower of the village church. But distrust occupies a large place
in the character of the villagers, and they fear the rich even when
bringing gifts. What hidden intention is there in this unwonted
generosity? The Mayor calls the Council together, and the result is a
long document for the donor to sign. He is to undertake to place the
clock in the tower at his own cost; he is to give an annuity of two
thousand _reales_ to meet any expenses connected with the clock; he is
to build another tower if the present one falls down “in my time or in
that of all the generations and heirs that may come after me”; he is to
pay for all lawsuits arising from the clock in the village, or in the
neighbourhood. When he tears up the paper, the villagers’ suspicion of
some afterthought in his gift is irrefragably confirmed. Lawsuits are
the passion of the Mountain. One has continued in Don Silvestre’s
family for seven generations, and he himself, having through poverty to
choose between remaining a bachelor all his life and giving up the
lawsuit, chooses the former without wavering. The last straw in his
friend’s patience is a lawsuit drawn up against him because, when he was
out shooting, part of a wall of loose stones round a peasant’s fields
crumbled down shortly after he happened to have fired at a bird.

“Bocetos al temple” (1876), and “Tipos Trashumantes” (1877), show the
same power of keen observation. Pereda, who treats the failings of the
peasants with unsparing, but withal benevolent humour, becomes merciless
and even cruel when dealing with the pretentiousness of the vulgar and
the inanity of rich _désœuvrés_. It has been wittily said of him that
“he reverses the apostolic precept: so far from suffering fools gladly,
he gladly makes fools suffer.” Without going outside his province he
found matter ready to his hand in the _veraneantes_, the _flâneurs_ from
Madrid, who passed the hot months in Santander.

Thus in “Tipos Trashumantes” he pillories the _sabio_, the learned man,
who allows that Cervantes was not an entirely common man, but regrets
that neither Cervantes nor Calderón possessed the “philosophy of
æsthetics,” or who despises the inhabitants of Santander because they
have not heard of Jeeéguel (Hegel); the _literato_ or journalist who,
because a speaker in Cortes had rendered Dante popular by a quotation,
murmurs, “_come corpo morto cade_” if he drops his stick or cigar; the
barber who misses in Santander that indefinable “air” of Madrid;--in
fact, a procession of quacks and knaves, and fools and snobs: perhaps
the only “sympathetic” figure is that of the Barón de la Rescoldera, who
“has never a good word nor a bad deed.” It is pleasant to turn back to
village scenes in “Tipos y Paisajes” (forming a second part of “Escenas
montañesas,” 1871). Here we find the enriched “Indian” (that is a
_montañés_ who has returned to his country after making a fortune in
South America); the schoolmaster, in a serviceable coat of black, who
writes letters for the whole village, and shuts himself up in his house
to get, if not drunk, at least very intoxicated; the peasant Blas, who,
after inheriting thirty thousand dollars, is miserable, but feels that
he must live _como un señor_ now that he is rich, and dismisses as a
temptation to be resisted the wish to go as of old, with goad on
shoulder, along the high-road by the side of his oxen; the practical,
rough, kindly priest, Don Perfecto; Don Robustiano, an old-fashioned
_hidalgo_, who does not allow the modern use of matches in his
household, and who, from the experiences of his own poverty, is not
easily misled, when he visits a neighbouring _hidalgo_, by the excuses
for “my wife and daughter at church.” “I see through you,” says Don
Robustiano to himself, “no doubt they are hidden away in some corner of
the house for lack of clothes.” But especially is the sketch entitled
_El Amor de los tizones_ admirable and worthy of Cervantes. It is a
description of a rustic gathering or _tertulia_ in the kitchen of one of
the poor houses of a mountain village. The peasants--each of them a
clearly defined character--enter one by one with the greeting, “Dios nos
acompañe” or, “Dios sea aquí,” and round the log fire, the flicker of
the flames lighting up their faces against the immense smoke-blackened
chimney, they pray a _rosario_ for the dead, or tell stories of
brigands, and witches, and enchantments. “Los hombres de pró”
(originally published with “Bocetos al temple”) and “El Buey Suelto”
(written in 1877) are still collections of sketches, the first of a
canvassing for an election in rural parts of Spain, the second, of the
miseries of bachelors, and the scenes in both are touched with Pereda’s
vividness and humour. Pereda, as a novelist proper, begins with “Don
Gonzalo González de la Gonzalera” (written in 1878), which describes the
effects of the revolution of 1868 on a small village of the Mountain,
with “De tal palo tal astilla” (1879), an answer to Pérez Galdós’ “Doña
Perfecta,” “El Sabor de la Tierruca” (1882) and “Pedro Sánchez” (1883).
“El Sabor de la Tierruca” (Savour of the Soil) is a whole-hearted book
of the _Montaña_; its serenity is scarcely disturbed by the frequent
village fights and rivalries in which the weapons are stout sticks cut
from the mountain-side. The book is filled with a fresh and acrid smell
of the earth and autumn scents, and has the peace of still days when not
a leaf stirs, and there is no movement in the ripe and yellow
maize-fields. It is a life lived and felt by the author and not
superficially observed, so that there is no trace of artificiality or
false sentiment in the descriptions. Cumbrales and Rinconeda are rival
villages, Cumbrales lying high among orchards, Rinconeda lower down on
the edge of the plain, in thick oak and chestnut woods. Rinconeda
rejoices when the raging _ábrego_, the south wind, sweeps in furious
gusts from the hills and ravages Cumbrales; Cumbrales rejoices when the
rain turns every street of Rinconeda into a rushing torrent. The
characters of the inhabitants of Cumbrales are drawn with all Pereda’s
skill; Juanguirle, for instance, a rich, hard-working peasant, the
simple, sensible Mayor of Cumbrales; Baldomero, who “cannot understand
how doing nothing, thinking of nothing, troubling about nothing, can be
unpleasant to any sensible person”; his father, Don Valentín, “hero of
Luchana” and worshipper of Espartero, who, after a frugal meal, says to
his son that it is not the part of good Liberals to be so indulging
themselves when the Carlists are flaunting “the black flag of tyranny,”
to which Baldomero answers laconically that it would have sounded more
convincing before the meal. There is an epic fight between the two
villages which rages so violently that the Mayor, Juanguirle, in vain
attempts to stop it “in the name of _la Josticia_, in the name of the
law, of _la Costitución_, of God Himself, if necessary, since, for lack
of a better, I am now His representative here.” A few moments afterwards
sad to relate, Juanguirle, stung by an insult hurled at Cumbrales, is in
the very thickest of the fray. In “Escenas montañesas” Pereda had
slightly sketched a _deshoja_, the harvest task of separating the ripe
cob of maize from its sheath. A certain number of cobs (from two to
six) are set aside from each large basketful for the poor, for the souls
in purgatory, and other pious purposes. In “El Sabor de la Tierruca” the
scene is described more fully. The workers, over fifty in number, sing
songs and slow ballads as the heaps of shining yellow cobs and the heaps
of crisp, white leaves grow and grow, and their singing is accompanied
at intervals by the noise of torrents of maize-cobs emptied from the
baskets. We have, too, a description of a _derrota_, when flocks and
herds are turned out promiscuously to graze, of the game of _cachurra_,
a kind of rustic hockey, and the simple feasts of roasted chestnuts with
a _bota_ of wine. Yet all is not “jest and youthful jollity.” The
peasants, in their prudent distrust, have a keen eye for witches, and a
weak old woman, of few words, poor and lonely, and in league with the
Devil, plays a sadly large part in the history of Cumbrales. So in
“Tipos y Paisajes,” the witch is feared not only by the boys whom she
surprises stealing the grapes in the garden of her hut, but by the whole
village. If a cow dies, it is the fault of the witch; if a man spends
his days drinking in the tavern, the misery of his family is traced, not
to him, but to the witch.


II.--“ON THE HEIGHTS”

In “Pedro Sánchez” Pereda, not without trepidation, travelled outside
his native region to Madrid, then, in 1854, “a large tumbledown village,
parched, old, and dirty;”[112] but Pedro Sanchez is a _montañés_, and
the first part of the book, before he leaves his native _Montaña_, in
style far exceeds the rest. The chief[113] works of Pereda, after “El
Sabor de la Tierruca” and “Pedro Sánchez,” were “Sotileza” (1885), “La
Puchera” (1889), and “Peñas arriba” (1895). “Sotileza” is a novel of the
old, now vanished, Santander. Both in the characters and the language it
is the most local of Pereda’s novels, and it is perhaps the one which
has become most famous. It has an atmosphere of pitch and tar and
sea-weed, and in the _Calle Alta_ nets and tattered rags hang from the
balconies, fishwives quarrel shrilly, and the strident, piercing cry of
the sardine-seller rends the air. Andrés, Muergo, and Cleto are all in
love with Silda, and Silda, growing up slight and graceful, and called
_Sotileza_ from the name for the thin wire or gut to which the fish-hook
is attached, is not naturally prone to let her feelings appear. But
Andrés, the son of a prosperous captain in the merchant service, cannot
marry beneath him; Muergo, the half-brutish, half-childish nephew of
tío Mechelín and tía Sidora, with whom Sotileza, an orphan, lives, is
conveniently drowned in a storm; and we leave Sotileza engaged to Cleto,
the honest son of tío Mocejón, who, with his wife, la Sargüeta, and his
daughter, Carpia, are the terror of the _Calle Alta_ and of _el pae
Polinar_. El padre Apolinar is a charitable, homely priest who receives
his poor petitioners with gruff words, but ends by giving them the
little that he possesses. One night, as he is writing his important
sermon, he is interrupted--not for the first time--by a poor woman whose
husband is ill. “Let her go to the doctor,” he exclaims; but when he
finds they are starving, “_Ave María Purísima_,” he cries twice, “and he
has three children and a wife, and there is no more honest man.” He
orders his old servant to bring the _puchero_ containing potatoes and a
little meat--the priest’s evening meal. After sniffing it deliciously,
he sends it off to the sick man, and as he resumes his sermon he says to
himself: “I have certainly read somewhere that to keep in good health
when engaged on so difficult a task as the one I now have in hand, there
is nothing better than to go to bed hungry. Well, there is no doubt as
to my being hungry, wolfishly hungry, to-night.” Sotileza leaves an
impression of wind-driven spray and tossing seas, of manly courageous
effort and vigour and zest of living; the difficulty of the language and
the roughness of the life described alike contribute to the power and
convincing character of the work. Pereda never showed more admirably his
capacity to raise the commonest lives, the most vulgar incidents and
the language of the street--of the strident _Calle Alta_ from which _pae
Polinar_ fled in comical dismay--to the region of high art. There is
something epical about his figures, in the clamorous feuds of the
fishwives not less than in the serene heroism of the deep-sea fishermen.
“La Puchera” is only half a sea-novel. The inhabitants of Robleces only
go sea-fishing to eke out the miserable pittance won by cultivation of
the soil. Thus in the house of Juan Pedro (called _El Lebrato_) and
Pedro Juan, his son (nicknamed _El Josco_, from his ferocious shyness),
fishing-tackle and oars mingle with agricultural tools. Juan Pedro is a
widower, and father and son are entirely devoted to one another, but
their house is untidy and uncomfortable for lack of a woman’s care.
Pedro Juan is in love with Pilara, Pilara is in love with Pedro Juan,
her family encourages the match, his father asks for nothing better, but
Pedro Juan cannot break through his timidity and bring himself to speak.
At last, however, he is emboldened when Pilara at the haymaking, in
scarlet skirt, bodice of striped blue, and headkerchief of many colours,
arranging the hay on the cart as he forks it up to her, leaps laughingly
from the last hay-cart into his arms. “Pilara, from here to the Church
for the señor priest to marry us. Will you agree to it?” And she
answers, “We might have been back long ago, _hijo de mi alma_, if you
had been different.” Though the miser of the book, Don Baltasar, is most
skilfully drawn, its interest centres more especially in the life of
Juan Pedro and Pedro Juan: Juan Pedro, gay and talkative, appearing on
festival days with his famous sea-boots, his Cochin-China medal, and a
silk necktie; Pedro Juan, who at his wedding, when asked by the priest,
Don Alejo, if he will have Pilara to be his wife, answers: “And will I
not indeed? She knows well I will, and you know it too.”

In 1895 appeared “Peñas arriba” (On the heights), the crown and
masterpiece of Pereda’s work. It is a novel of the high mountain, as
“Sotileza” is a novel of the sea. Don Celso lives in Tablanca in his
ancestral house which holds lordship over a whole valley and has had the
honour of lodging two prelates, the Bishops of León and Santander; but
Don Celso is old and in failing health, and he so urgently begs his
nephew Marcelo to come to him that, against his will, the latter leaves
Madrid and his comfortable rooms in the _Calle del Arenal_. After a long
ride on and on over high mountain passes and narrow, precipitous paths
and haunts of bears, he reaches Tablanca after nightfall. A whistle from
his attendant, Chisco, the barking of dogs, an uncertain light moving to
and fro, black shapes round the light, a sound of voices, and Marcelo is
received into his uncle’s arms. Next day, from the wide balconies, he
discovers the mountains on one side nearly touching the house, on the
other a chequer-work of green meadows and yellow stubble-fields of maize
against a background of mountains green and brown and grey, and the
village among rocks and brushwood and intricate paths. There is a saying
in the village that the largest piece of flat ground is the floor of
Don Celso’s dining-room. Of the characters of the book Don Sabas belongs
to that noble army of humble parish priests described by Pereda--the
village priest in “De tal palo tal astilla”; Don Frutos, discreet and
talkative, in “Don Gonzalo”; the joyous priest of Robleces, _regocijado
de humor_, in “La Puchera,” whose only vice is to go out to sea twice a
week with the fishing-boats; and the incomparable _pae Polinar_ in
“Sotileza.” Don Sabas has a passion for the mountain, and, once upon the
heights, the exact word and the right phrase come to him in which to
express his enthusiasm and his deep knowledge of their plants and
animals. To have given him a bishopric in a flat country would have
meant death to him. He is fearless and untiring whether he is tracking a
bear, or out in a snow-blizzard on the heights to rescue some peasant or
herdsman who has not returned to the village, or visiting the sick on a
black night of storm. Don Celso is also a noble figure, practical and
imposing, and in his immense kitchen of an evening he holds a
patriarchal gathering of peasants. We have, too, the splendid Tolstoian
figure of the _hidalgo_ of ancient race, Gómez de Pomar, the author of
many books, unloading a cart of hay in his simple peasant’s dress. He is
a model of noble courtesy--_hidalga cortesía_, his style is “spirited
and vigorous, pure Castilian untainted, as the blood that flows in his
veins.” Consciously or unconsciously, it is a self-portrait of Pereda.
The book abounds in impressive scenes and characters; it was a subject
dear to Pereda’s heart, and he produced a work which ranks among the
great novels of the world. There is a certain solidity in Pereda’s
writing well suited to describe the stern deep-shadowed
mountain-country, while his unlatin love of the wild and desolate
rejoices in the hurricanes that tear up trees and whirl the snow-drifts
on the mountain-side. “Peñas arriba” represents the whole life and being
of the author and gives us a full measure of the true _sabor de la
tierruca_, the savour of the soil. In “Esbozos y Rasguños” Pereda
ridicules those mad Cervantists who prove that Cervantes was omniscient,
an excellent theologian, a cook, a sailor, a geographer, a freethinker,
and who will soon prove that neither is Cervantes Cervantes, nor _Don
Quixote Don Quixote_. But of the true spirit of Cervantes he had imbibed
a large part, even though he never attained to his great-hearted
tolerance and the wider outlook of those more spacious times. His
prose[114] is robust and austerely free from foreign idioms, laden with
dialect and phrases native to the soil. It has caught the vigorous
freshness of the mountain air, and the scent of earth and woods and
moors, the rush of the sea and the elemental simplicity of men ennobled
by constant contact with earth and ocean. Pereda wrote out of the
fulness of his heart, without seeking popularity. His rough grandeur,
rugged as the country of “Peñas arriba,” his frequent use of dialect,
his untranslatableness, make for few readers. But those who, like Don
Sabas, care to leave the level country and climb the mountain height,
will find in Pereda a classic, high and steadfast as the hills. Blindly
though the iniquity of oblivion scattereth her poppy, it is perhaps not
“prodigiously temerarious” to suspect that Pereda may still be read when
Zola is forgotten.




XXII

CASTILIAN PROSE


“The Spanish language,” said an English writer in 1701, “is properly
none at all, for if the Spaniards were to restore to the Egyptians,
Grecians, Arabians, Moors, Jews, Romans, Vandals, Huns, Goths, French,
and, lastly, Italians, the words they have taken from them, they must of
necessity remain dumb.” And, again, the Spanish language “consists of
a’s and o’s, and nothing else but mouthing and grimace.” Another
Englishman, sixty years later, says of the Spanish language, that “As
there is something pompous and magnificent in the length of its words
and the sound of them, so there is also a peculiarity in the turn and
manner of their phrases and expressions.” In the time of Spain’s
greatness a larger measure of justice is bestowed on the Spanish
language. “It is expressive, noble, and grave,” says Mme. d’Aulnoy; “it
is only our own (_i.e._ French) which excels it.” But with the decay of
Spain’s material prosperity the language seems to have fallen into a
disrepute; can a nation that possesses no gold currency and no
battleships possess a language or literature worthy of the name? It may
be admitted that many modern Spaniards themselves do not write correct
or idiomatic Spanish; the language has been crowded with foreign
importations, and while it is the easiest language to learn
superficially, it is, by reason of its immense wealth of words and
baffling reserves of idioms, one of the most difficult to learn well.
“The best Castilian is here spoken,” said Mme. d’Aulnoy of Burgos, and
it is still in Castille that the purest Spanish is to be learnt, in
regions, _i.e._ where, owing to the climate, the foreigner makes but a
briefest stay. Toledo is more likely to be visited for two days to see
its churches, than for two months to learn the language; it gives no
inviting impression of comfort to the stranger. In “Don Quixote” we read
that “They cannot speak so well who are brought up in the Zocodover as
those who spend the day walking to and fro in the cloisters of the
Cathedral, yet all are Toledans.” But although among the peasants of
Spain there are many _prevaricadores del buen lenguaje_, with reckless
transposition of consonants (such as _probe_ for _pobre_), their
language is often essentially purer and more idiomatic, with “a
peculiarity in the turn and manner of their phrases,” than that of the
_reprochadores de voquibles_, who cast it in their teeth, and who would
die rather than offend _la grammaire_, but allow themselves the constant
use of foreign words and expressions in the construction of their
sentences. True Castilian has a combined softness and vigour, enabling
it to be at once impassioned and concise, a harmony and strength
scarcely to be found in any other language, and a pithiness which
springs from the soil and has not its origin in books. Many of Spain’s
greatest writers have wielded lance and pen alternately; they are not
“grammarians who hack and slash for the genitive case,” but in the clear
shock and flow of vowels, scarcely interrupted by their setting of
slurred consonants, we seem to hear a rumour of battle, and their words
can be, like those of St. Francis of Assisi preaching, _a modo che
saette acute_--very sharp arrows. This native vigour corrects the
tendency to rich magnificence and trailing growth of words; while
without this richness the Castilian language might be like staccato
Catalan--a succession of quick pistol-shots, as it were, not the stately
tones of an organ. It is not too much to say that Castilian--not the
miserable Castilian of many of the newspapers and many modern authors,
but Castilian at its best--has been excelled only by Greek. It is thus a
language truly worth studying, and it is easily learnt; it has, next to
English, the widest extension in the world, and it possesses a splendid
literature of eight centuries, continued at the present day in a number
of characteristic and fascinating novels. Yet the Castilian language,
literarily, is so little studied that it seems to be considered to be
“properly none at all;” and these novels when read in translations lose
their savour. Cervantes prophesied that “Don Quixote” would be
translated into all nations and languages, but, as Dante said that
poetry cannot be translated “senza rompere tutta sua dolcezza e
armonia,” so Cervantes likens translations to the reverse side of
Flemish tapestries--the figures still visible, but obscured by a crowd
of thread-ends. The best Spanish is still to be found in the writers of
the golden age of Spanish literature, and especially in the writings of
the mystics.

The style of Cervantes changes with his characters, who are allowed to
murder Castilian in Spanish-Basque or Gascon-Catalan, but he is a master
at will of the purest Castilian, in him never divorced from the full
flavour of life, and he refers scornfully to the spurious continuation
of “Don Quixote” as “written in Aragonese.” Equally _castizo_, hardily
idiomatic and flavoured pungently, is the style of Quevedo. Of modern
writers, Valera and Pereda, differing so widely, are alike in this, that
they are both masters of noble Castilian prose, and have nothing to say
to the imported phraseologies which pervade a large proportion of modern
Spanish writing. Pérez Galdós, too, has a thoroughly Spanish style,
robust and vigorous, rich in words, idiomatic. The most recent Spanish
writers in a novellizing spirit tread more delicately; they resemble
Sancho Panza, who, “when he was Governor, learnt to eat fastidiously, _á
lo melindroso_, so that he would eat grapes and even the seeds of a
pomegranate with a fork.” The style of León, indeed, is full and
fine-sounding, and, like that of Valera, carries us back to the writings
of the mystics in the sixteenth century; but Valle-Inclán (guilty only
very occasionally of words such as _madama_ or _dandy_) and _Azorín_
have a mastery of deliberately thin, exquisitely clear-cut prose.[115]
“Llovía menudo y ligero en aquella fertil valle del Baztan....”; in this
passage of Valle-Inclán’s “Gerifaltes de Antaño” (1909), as in so many
others, we have a delicate finished picture, reached after much labour
of rejection and compression, though he has the art to conceal his
_affres du style_. In a language so inexhaustibly rich as the Spanish,
and with the tendency of Spaniards to write in hurried, copious fashion,
this choice and sifting of words is welcome, and is in no danger of
being carried to excess.




XXIII

TOLEDO AND EL GRECO


The fame of El Greco[116] has of late years spread and deepened,
although the full fascination of his pictures will perhaps never be
understood, except by a few. Of his life we have but one or two
threadbare details, and this is the more tantalizing because we feel
that his life and character were of a strange, alluring interest.
Before his coming to Spain, the most interesting fact we learn
concerning him is contained in a letter of the artist Julio Clovio,
written in November, 1570: “There has arrived in Rome a young Cretan, a
disciple of Titian, and, in my opinion, an excellent painter--_parmi
raro nella pittura_.” The date of El Greco’s birth is uncertain, but if
he was a _giovine_ in 1570, he would hardly have been seventy-seven at
the time of his death in 1614. This assertion as to his age was made
when the date of his death was given as 1625. It has been conjectured
that it arose from an easy confusion between _sesenta_ and _setenta_,
and that he was not seventy-seven but sixty-seven; the year of his birth
would then be 1547. The exact date of his arrival at Toledo is unknown,
but it was about the year 1575; certainly in or before 1577. Toledo had
ceased to be the capital and court of Spain, yet still remained the home
not only of princes of the Church, but of many men of letters, and the
Arabic MS. of “Don Quixote” was discovered in its market-place. Its
cathedral was “the richest church in Christendom.” An Italian work
published at Venice in 1563 records that “the priests reign triumphant
in Toledo--_trionfano_--and give themselves up to good living, and no
one reproves them.” The power of the Inquisition was at its height. From
the gloom of the Escorial, Philip II.’s narrow, unbending spirit found
many echoes in the stern cities of Castille. El Greco lived to see the
expulsion of the Moriscos, and the utter decay of the trade and industry
of Toledo and other cities. Antonelli’s project to make the Tagus
navigable as far as Toledo was rejected scornfully: would not God have
made it navigable had it been His will? Yet it was the golden age of
Spanish letters, and during El Greco’s sojourn at Toledo the most
humorous and broadly human figure of all literature was being elaborated
in Cervantes’ brain. El Greco died at Toledo two years before the death
of Cervantes and Shakespeare.

Pacheco says of El Greco that he was “in all things as singular as in
his paintings.” Other stray notices represent him as “a great
philosopher,” “eloquent in discourse,” a witty, acute speaker--_de
agudos dichos_--a writer on painting, sculpture and architecture. We are
further told that he earned many ducats but spent them in pomp and
display, even keeping musicians to play to him during his meals. He
would seem to have retained the soft atmosphere of Italian luxury amid
the narrow, gloomy Toledo streets, and to have introduced an alien note
of pleasure into the cold, intense existence of Castille. But if his
life preserved about it a certain tinge of Venice (Venice that spent
what Venice earned), his art was essentially Spanish. The mannerism of
his painting might be deemed extravagant, as his caprices might not be
understood, by many Spaniards. He was, they might say, “too picked, too
spruce, too affected, too odd, as it were, too peregrinate.” They are
the epithets of Holofernes describing a Spaniard; and what could be more
Spanish than El Greco’s mingling of keen vision and realistic power as a
portrait painter with an intense, unfailing spiritualism; than his
vehement, almost tortured desire to shun the common and the vulgar--not
the mere seeking after originality but a wish to be sincere, to express
his own soul? His manner has not the sensuous richness of Italy but a
Castilian, nay, a Toledan austerity. It is as “a sword of Spain, the
ice-brook’s temper.” Already in his famous “Expolio” (in the Sacristy of
Toledo Cathedral), painted not long after he had arrived in Spain, he
had, as Señor Cossío says, abandoned the reds and golds of Italy for
blue and carmine and ashen grey. As to the price of this picture he had
a quarrel with the Chapter of Toledo Cathedral.[117] Assessors were
appointed to value it and they found that, though the picture was beyond
all price--_no tiene prescio ni estimación_--a verdict with which all
who have seen the “Expolio” will readily agree, yet, having regard to
“these poverty-stricken times,” they assessed it at nine hundred ducats,
an extraordinarily high price for that period. The Chapter, on the
other hand, offered a much smaller sum, and that under the condition
that he should remove certain “improprieties”--_ynpropiedades_--from the
picture, among them the figures of “the Virgin and the saints--_las
marias y nuestra señora_--whose presence in the picture is contrary to
the gospel, seeing that they were not actually present.” El Greco held
out for his own price, but the Mayor, siding with the Chapter, decreed
that he must either give up the picture or go to prison, and the painter
submitted. The exquisitely beautiful figures that he was to have removed
are, however, still in the picture, as well as the other
_ynpropiedades_, so that he seems at least to have defied the narrow
spirit of the letter in the priests who “reigned triumphant” at Toledo.
Perhaps--in the temper of Alonso Cano towards the Chapter of Granada
Cathedral--he threatened to destroy the “Expolio,” and the Chapter,
having given him a hundred and fifty ducats on account, would be
unwilling to lose their picture. Certainly El Greco would not say to
himself with Frà Lippo Lippi--

                            “they must know!
    Don’t you think they’re the likeliest to know,
    They, with their Latin? so I swallow my rage,
    Clench my teeth, suck my lips in tight, and paint
    To please them.”

El Greco painted to please no one but himself and his individual vision.
His next great picture, the “San Mauricio,” was painted by command of
Philip II., but it did not please the King and in his lifetime was not
placed in the Escorial, where it now is. _No le contentó á su Magestad_,
says Sigüenza, and he goes on to say, “and this is small wonder, since
it pleases but few, though it is said that it shows much art, _aunque
dizen es de mucho arte_.” It is conceivable that the picture as a whole
might seem ugly, and repel, especially on a first view, before the eye
had embraced its wealth of beautiful details. The real reason, however,
of its “not pleasing” was not the exaggerated drawing nor the harsh
colouring, the dominant note of yellow and blue, but the realistic
portrayal of the group of martyrs in the foreground. “Saints,” proceeded
Sigüenza, “should be painted in such a manner that they may not take
away the desire to pray, but may rather incite to devotion.”

    “‘Ay, but you don’t so instigate to prayer,’
     Strikes in the Prior! ‘when your meaning’s plain
     It does not say to folks--remember matins--
     Or, mind you fast next Friday.’”

The Spanish Church would willingly have reduced art to skull and bones.
But El Greco saw that his Saints must be human before they could be
divine. He had now inaugurated that realism which was to find its
highest expression in the art of Velázquez, but which is evident also in
the Saints and Madonnas of Murillo.

El Greco has not the immediate attraction and universal appeal of
Velázquez; some of his pictures may displease at first and only
gradually make their charm felt. What, then, we may ask, is El Greco’s
peculiar fascination, the dominating power to attract or to repel in
his pictures so great that it is apt to become almost an obsession? Is
it the truth to life, or the aloofness from life, the clear expression
of character or the spiritual submission to divine will? Does it lie in
his fondness for those cold, simple colours, the pale greens and lilacs,
grey and the blue of hydrangeas or of the surface of ice, that delight
the soul of “primitive” and “decadent” alike; in the pervading life and
movement, the slender, lengthened limbs and tapering figures; in the
subtle permanence of expressions and attitudes that were “so fugitive”?
Is it the passionate sincerity and striving that disdains rest and mere
complacency of work accomplished, the noble discontent with effects
achieved, the ceaseless longing to reach yet higher levels, till
ultimately, as in his “Asunción,” the whole picture is moulded to a
perfect realization of the soul’s desire, a harmonious unity of
aspiration, “toccando un poco la vita futura”? Or is it the exquisite
sadness, the air of acquiescence in suffering and fate unshunnable, or
the wonderful peace and serene joy of some of his faces? It is a rare
combination of all this that gives the essence of El Greco’s potent
charm; it is the richness of contrast so truly Spanish, the marvellous
rendering alike of heavenly things and things terrestrial, the wild
magic of his imagination, the sober individual alchemy of his style. In
these delicate lines, thin faces, long white limbs and restrained
colours there is a spiritual intensity that impassions and consumes with
a light and fire reaching beyond dim mortal vision. But in the
expression there is, moreover, a softness of lingering pity, of linked
sweetness and tears for earthly sorrows, that makes his art not cold and
distant, appealing merely to the intellect, but lovable and human; “a
thing ensky’d and sainted,” yet still bound by gold chains about the
feet of man.

The little church of Santo Tomé, with its beautiful old tower, stands
but a few hundred yards from El Greco’s house at Toledo, and for this
church he painted perhaps the most beautiful and certainly the most
important of all his works--“El Entierro del Conde Orgaz.” For an artist
the “Entierro” has almost as much interest and instruction as “Las
Meninas” of Velázquez. The subject is a local legend. Saint Augustine
and Saint Stephen come down to carry to burial the corpse of the
charitable Conde de Orgaz--of whom we read that he “employed his life in
holy works and so came to a holy death”--and the chief citizens of
Toledo mourn him. In this long line of faces El Greco shows his full
mastery as a portrait-painter. And we may see in them all the race of
Castille--Castilian dignity, frankness, nobility, sadness, resignation,
pride, haughtiness, intensity, ascetic mysticism. We seem, as we look,
to hear the solemn rhythm of Jorge Manrique’s verses--[118]

    “Este mundo es el camino
     Para el otro, que es morada
     Sin pesar;
     Mas cumple tener buen tino
     Para andar esta jornada
     Sin errar.
     Partimos cuando nacemos,
     Andamos mientras vivimos,
     Y llegamos
     Al tiempo que fenecemos;
     Así que cuando morimos
     Descansamos.”

The light of the torches burning in long thin flame and the upward look
of the priest in plain surplice draw the eye up to the second part of
the picture, the _Gloria_, where the Conde de Orgaz appears before
Christ and the Virgin in a heaven thronged with apostles and saints and
supported by angels. The beauty of the lower part is as easily
recognizable as that of a picture of Velázquez, but the _Gloria_ takes
longer to appreciate, having a fuller measure of El Greco’s mannerism.
Partly for this reason the picture may displease at first, permanently
displease if seen once only in a cursory glance, but on a more leisured
study it assumes its right place as one of the wonderful and most
beautiful pictures of the world. It requires time, too, to realize the
infinite beauty of detail, the figures on St. Augustine’s robe, the
scene of St. Stephen’s stoning on that of St. Stephen, and the skill
with which all monotony is avoided in the mourners, in spite of their
being nearly all of the same height, and nearly all wearing white ruffs
and pointed beards.

In his later pictures El Greco increased the mannerism of his style; the
figures are longer, more angular, the intensity of expression becomes
an obsession, a paroxysm: he paints as one for whom the whole world has
ceased to exist. Sometimes, as in the “Baptism” at Toledo, these
exaggerations seriously spoil the beauty of his work; but the “Asunción”
of the church of San Vicente, at Toledo, also belongs to his later
style, and is not the least beautiful of his pictures: in no other work
of art has the sense of motion been so marvellously expressed--the
Virgin, saints, and angels seem actually floating upwards before our
eyes. El Greco’s mannerism, _jene unglaubliche Manier_, Herr Carl Justi
calls it, is more evident in some of his pictures, in others less; but
there is not a sufficiently wide gulf between them to justify the saying
that “they are so different that they appear not to be painted by the
same hand,”[119] nor to countenance Palomino’s statement that “What he
did well no one did better, and what he did badly no one did worse.”

It was not carelessly nor ignorantly that El Greco drew his figures out
of proportion, making them preternaturally long and thin. He did so
deliberately, just as Bacon said deliberately that “In all beauty there
is some strangeness of proportion,” and the effect in El Greco’s
pictures often, indeed as a rule, justifies his boldness. We see him

    “Pouring his soul ...
     Reaching, that Heaven might so replenish him,
     Above and through his art--for it gives way;
     That arm is wrongly put--and there again--
     A fault to pardon in the drawing’s lines,
     Its body, so to speak! its soul is right.”

Naturally the peculiarity of his style has at once struck all observers.
So the French have spoken of his “maladresses enfantines, audaces
troublantes,” his “attitudes strapassées,” his “draperies cassées et
chiffonnées á plaisir,” his “dessin fantastique.” So Sir Edmund Head
wrote of some of El Greco’s pictures as “extravagant in length, of an
ashen-grey tone, most singular in so fine a colourist.” If only glanced
at once, this is perhaps the impression that the majority of his
pictures would leave, and he thus remains a sphinx to many. “He will
always remain caviare to the multitude,” wrote Sir J. C. Robinson in
1868; “the uninitiated observer passes over [his pictures] with wonder
and bewilderment, the grim angular figures and draperies and the
flickering unrest of all the details affecting him as would a harsh
tumult of discordant sounds.”

Palomino said of El Greco that “he ended by making his painting
despicable and ridiculous alike by extravagance of drawing and harshness
of colour.” His contemporaries explained the singularity of his work
either as due to madness or to craving for effect, _por valentía, para
salir del día_, or to a wish to prevent them from being confused with
those of Titian!

Not less than his drawing, El Greco’s colouring has been a
stumbling-block and an offence. We read of his “teintes presque
cadavériques,” “coloris grisâtre, pâle blafard,” “symphonies en bleu
mineur;” and Ford characteristically wrote that his pictures were often
“as leaden as cholera morbus.” After the rich reds and golds of Italian
painting, the subtler tints of El Greco, evolved by him partly under
Tintoretto’s influence, partly under the influence of Toledo, could not
please his contemporaries, but we feel now that they are no slight
ingredient of his charm. In colouring El Greco largely influenced
Velázquez, and through Velázquez all subsequent painting. Velázquez
learnt from him, in the words of Señor Cossío, “his harmony of silver
greys and the use of certain carmines.” But it was not only El Greco’s
colouring that affected him. Señor Cossío sees in the construction of
“The Surrender of Breda” vague reminiscences of the “San Mauricio,” and
one may also see in it reminiscences of the “Expolio.” Palomino, in his
Life of Velázquez, says that “in his portraits he imitated Domenico
Greco, for he considered that his heads could not be sufficiently
praised.” Velázquez rejected El Greco’s mystic intellectuality, but
possibly without El Greco’s influence the realism of Velázquez might
have been excessively exact and less inspired.

Toledo, in the words of a modern Spanish poet, stands “dark, ruinous,
forgotten and alone;” but Domenico[120] Theotocopuli, who lay there
unremembered for three centuries, now rises to spread his fame through
the world--

    “Tout passe. L’art robuste
     Seul a l’éternité,
     Le buste
     Survit à la cité.”

Foreigners from many lands climb up and down the cobbled lanes and
passages, in search of hidden churches here and there with pictures by
El Greco--Santo Tomé, San José, San Vicente, Santa Leocadia, San
Nicolás, and many more:

    “The sanctuary’s gloom no longer wards
     Vain tongues from where his pictures stand apart.”

He loved to paint the city, and, besides his famous view of it, we find
it in the background of his pictures. The Cathedral and the Bridge of
Alcántara and the Castle of San Servando are perfectly distinct in the
“Asunción” of the Church of San Vicente. The city figures again, though
less clearly, in the magnificent picture of St. Martin (of Tours)
dividing his cloak, an act of charity that certainly receives a new
significance in this bleak, unsheltered Toledo country. And Toledo, not
Troy, appears in the “Laocoon,” the only picture by El Greco that has a
classical subject. El Greco, the Cretan, lived at Toledo for some forty
years, and the charm of Toledo seems to have entered into his soul. His
house was not in one of the smothered streets, but in an open space high
above the Tagus, opposite the Synagogue of the Jews.[121] It has a cool
_patio_ with a floor of red bricks and glazed tiles, and four white
pillars, with a tiny well near the entrance, and a grey wooden gallery
above, resting on the pillars, and open on one side, so that in spring
swallows occasionally enter and whirl round the court. To the right a
door leads to a quaint, old-fashioned kitchen, with its immense open
fireplace and seats on either side beneath the chimney. That El Greco, a
foreigner, should have become the most Spanish of Spanish painters, was
due no doubt to the influence exercised over him by this stern yet
luring city of Castille. It is impossible to dissociate his colouring
from the many greens and greys and browns of the city and surrounding
country, the rust-coloured soil of the Cigarrales thinly covered with
many greens that are not green, grey hill-plants, dull tints of thyme
and olive, the shriller green of pomegranate and other fruit-trees, the
grass sun-parched to patches of yellow. And perhaps it is not altogether
fanciful to connect the metallic gleams visible in certain lights on the
surface of the Tagus with the glazed effects so frequent in El Greco’s
pictures, or even the ragged, wind-tormented elms by the river with some
of his more extravagant figures. The city points upward like a grey
sword; and whether seen in shafts and foils of orange light against a
stormy sunset, or fainting and crumbling greyly beneath a relentless sun
and sky of cloudless blue, it has the austere intensity that we find in
El Greco’s work. Yet, as in the greyest pictures of El Greco occurs some
relieving touch of colour, so Toledo is not merely a monotonous symmetry
of brown or grey. A procession, white and gold and red and purple,
passes through the narrow streets under a shower of roses from the
balconies of houses gaily hung in white and red, red and yellow; or the
bright colours of peasants’ dresses are to be seen against the ancient
Alcántara bridge as they come in to market; or in some street of
stifling, windowless walls that lead up to a line of blue sky by day,
and at night to a ribbon of stars, comes a glimpse, through doors of
massive ancient stone, of a _patio_ of bright flowers--carnations,
nasturtiums, geraniums--as one may find a picture of El Greco in some
old forgotten Church; and beneath the yellow-brown walls and grey rocks
of the city are gardens of fruit-trees, where in spring nightingales
sing from pomegranates in scarlet flower. It is a city of continual
surprises, not to be understood or appreciated in a single day or a
single visit; it gives, like El Greco’s pictures, a strong original
impression at a first glance, but its inner being, its softer moments,
its true significance and charm it reveals only to a patient study. Its
attitude is indeed that of reserve; it seems to be holding judgment on
modern civilization. It represents all that is noblest, most individual,
and unbendingly austere in the spirit of Spain.




INDEX


A

Abenabet, _King of Seville_, 101

_Afforestation_, 99

_Agriculture_, 97, 203

Ajofrín, 90

Alarcón (Pedro Antonio de), 195

Alas (Leopoldo) _Clarín_, 150, 193, 196, 197

Alfonso, _el Sabio_, quoted, 98

_Alhambra, The_, 89

Alicante, 113, 114, 115

Almería, 57, 113

Altabiscar, Poem of, 62

Altamira (Rafael), quoted, 22, 25

Amadeo I., _King of Spain_, 43, 198-199

Andalucía, 103, 128, 134-141, 186, 195

_Andalusians_, 25, 26, 90, 140, 188, 190

André (E. L.), 39

Antequera, 137

_Anti-Clericals_, 39, 40, 81, 199, 200

Aragon, 26, 100

Arenys de Mar, 104

Arriba, 75

Asturians, 26, 196

Asturias, 196

Atchuria, 64, 65

Avila, 87

Augustinians, 166, 181

Aulnoy, Mme. d’, quoted, 20, 29, 52, 59, 60, 62, 239, 240

Azorín. _See_ Martínez Ruiz.

_Azulejos_, 132, 194


B

Bacon (Francis), quoted, xi, 33, 34, 41, 252

Barcelona, 88, 91, 104

Baroja (Pío), 27, 93, 208, 209

Basque Provinces, 50, 63, 66-79, 210-211

_Basques_, 25, 28, 61, 62, 66-79, 209, 225

Bayonne, 63

_Beggars_, 29, 87, 126

Béhobie, bridge of, 61

Benavente (Jacinto), 27, 41

Berceo (Gonzalo de), 39, 93

Berenger (Remont), _Count of Barcelona_, 159-160

_Betting_, 73, 74

Biarritz, 63

Bidasoa, 57-61, 65

Bilbao, 60, 88

Blasco Ibáñez (Vicente), 38, 123, 149, 152, 193, 205-208

Böhl von Faber (Cecilia). _See_ Fernán Caballero.

_Booksellers_, 172

Borrow (George), 53

_Brigands_, 47, 194

Browning (Robert), quoted, 248, 249, 253, 256

_Bullfights_, 38

Burgos, 87, 158, 240

Burton’s _Anatomy_, quoted, 88

Butler, _Bishop_, quoted, 35

C

_Caciquismo_, 23, 204

Cadiz, 88

Calderón de la Barca (Pedro), 32, 55, 227

Cambridge, 165

Camões (Luiz), quoted, 25, 26, 251

Cantabria, 63, 223-238

Cardeña, 139

_Carlists_, 76, 78, 81, 84, 210, 211, 223, 230

Carranza, _Archbishop_, 165, 169, 170

Cartagena, 116

Castejon, 158

Castelar (Emilio), 149, 198

_Castilian language_, viii, 24, 163, 181, 193, 202,
     212, 221, 222, 237, 239-243, 245

_Castilians_, 26, 93, 94, 95, 96, 212 251

Castille, 48, 54, 66, 92-96, 232, 246

Castro (León de), 166, 167, 168, 173

_Catalan language_, 241

_Catalans_, 26, 34, 79

Catalonia, 104-107

_Celestina, La_, 144

Cervantes, 48, 146, 147, 182, 227, 237, 241, 242, 246
  “Don Quixote,” 28, 88, 139, 146, 185, 240, 242, 245
  Don Quixote, 30, 151, 207
  Sancho, 27, 33, 40, 54, 242

Charlemagne, 62

_Church in Spain, the_, 39, 40, 200, 201, 245-246, 249

_Cid, Poema del_, 144, 150, 153-162

Cid, the, 87, 102, 144, 153-162

Clarín. _See_ Alas (L.)

Clarke (Edward), quoted, 21, 239

Clarke (Henry Butler), 79

Claudian, quoted, 48

_Climate_, viii, 37, 54, 93, 100

Clovio (Julio), 245

Coloma (Luis), 201

Córdoba, 90, 101, 103, 140

Cortese (Paolo), quoted, 18

Creighton (Mandell), _Bishop of London_, quoted, 44

Creixell, 106-107


D

_Dances, Basque_, 73

Dante, quoted, 26, 130, 241, 250

_Deshoja, A_, 230-231

Díaz de Bivar (Rodrigo). _See_ Cid.

_Diligencias_, 50, 51, 52

Dominicans, 166, 168

_Dress_, 53, 54, 77, 106, 135


E

Ebro, the, 100

_Education_, 140

Edward II., _King of England_, 63

Eibar, 73

Elgoibar, 73

Emigration, 100, 203, 225

England and Spain, 25, 63, 166

_Escorial, the_, 98

_Eskuara_, 59, 60, 62, 64, 68, 70-71, 76, 85-86

Espronceda (José de), 149

Estella, 81, 217

Estremadura, 98


F

Fernán Caballero, 185-191, 193

Fitzmaurice-Kelly (James), quoted, 142, 143, 146-147, 185, 195, 215, 227

Flaubert (Gustave), 192, 197

Ford (Richard), 25, 36, 47, 51, 53, 253

France (Anatole), quoted, 30

Francis of Assisi, Saint, 241

Francis I., King of France, 57

Fuenterrabía, 58, 62, 63, 85-86

_Fueros_, 76, 78, 79

_Funeral offerings_, 75


G

Galicia, 214-221

_Gallegos_, 25, 26, 214, 216, 220

Ganivet (Ángel), 22

Gallipienzo, 83

Gasset (Rafael), 99

Gautier (Théophile), quoted, 254, 256

_Generalife, the_, 89

Gibraltar, 207

_Giralda, the_, 126, 133, 188

Gómez de Baquero (E.), 201

Góngoray Argote (Luis), 148

Goya [Francisco Goya y Lucientes], 192

Granada, 88-89

_Grao, El_, 115, 205

Grazalema, 136, 137

Greco, El, 208, 243, 244-258

Guadalete, the, 137

Guadalquivir, the, 133, 140

Guernica, 76

_Guernicaco Arbola_, 76, 77

Guipúzcoa, 64, 67, 68, 78


H

Hendaye, 59

_Heresy_, 38, 172, 173

Horace, quoted, 71

_Houses_, 21

_Huerta, the Valencian_, 115-116, 121, 122, 124, 161, 205

Hugo (Victor), quoted, 47, 49, 57, 114, 115

Hurtado de Mendoza (Diego), 145


I

Ibiza, 205, 206

_Idearium Español_, 22

Île des Faisans, 60

_Inns_, 52, 140-141

_Inquisition, the_, 34, 38, 39, 147, 148, 168-184, 246

_Inscriptions_, 58, 60, 61, 64, 67, 77-78

_Irrigation_, 98, 99, 121-124

Irun, 62, 73, 198

Isabel II., _Queen of Spain_, 187, 188, 198


J

James I., _King of Aragon_, quoted, 26, 31

_Jews_, 167, 176

Jijona, 102

Jimena, wife of El Cid, 157, 158, 160

Johnson (Samuel), quoted, 47

Joseph, _King of Spain_, 42

Juan Manuel, _Infante_, quoted, 101


K

Kipling (Rudyard), quoted, 50


L

La Rhune, 64

Larramendi (Manuel de), 72, 74

_Lazarillo de Tormes_, 144, 145, 150, 202

León, 48, 87, 90

---- (Luis de), 148, 149, 151, 163-184

---- (Ricardo), 23, 24, 94, 211, 212, 242-243

Longfellow (H. W.), quoted, 52, 92

Loti (Pierre) [Julien Viaud], 73, 74

_Louis XIV._, _King of France_, 60, 64

Lumbier, 83


M

Madrid, 99, 198, 202, 203, 207, 228, 231, 232

Maeztu (Ramiro de), quoted, 36

_Makhilas_, 77

Málaga, 137, 138

Mallada (Lucas), quoted, 22

Manrique (Jorge), 251

Marbot, _General_, 61

----, quoted, 18

Mariana (Juan de), 37, 70

Martial, quoted, 26, 54, 100

Martínez Ruiz (J.), _Azorín_, 22, 89-90, 94-96, 193, 208, 209

Masdeu, quoted, 19

Menéndez y Pelayo (Marcelino), 151, 192

_Montaña, La_, 26, 223, 226, 228-238

Montano (Arias), 173

Montoro, 140

_Moors in Spain, the_, 26, 31, 86, 101, 161, 246

Murcia, 90, 114

Murillo (Bartolomé Esteban), 249

_Mystics_, 148, 149, 192, 193, 194, 242


N

Napier (Sir W.), _Lieut.-General_, quoted, 17, 18, 26, 64

Napoleon, 42, 61

Narváez (Ramón María), _General_, 30

Navarre, 80-84

_Navarrese_, 26, 83

_Norias_, 108-109

_Novels_, ix, 144, 151, 185-238, 241


O

Ocaña, 90

Ondarrabia, 85, 86

_Oranges, Court of_, 90, 126

Oropesa, 108-111

Oviedo, 197

_Ox-carts_, 74

Oxford, 165


P

Pacheco (Francisco), 245

Palacio Valdés (Armando), 88, 193, 195-196, 200

_Papal authority in Spain_, 146, 147, 183

Pardo Bazán (Emilia), 185, 205, 214-217, 222

_Parish Priests_, 76, 215, 233, 236

Pascal (Blaise), 148, 171

_Pastorales, Basque_, 69-70

_Patios_, viii, 54, 88, 90, 131, 133, 189, 256

_Peasants_, 71, 82, 83, 94, 100, 110, 120-124, 135,
      140, 141, 205, 215-216, 226-227, 229-230, 240

_Pelota, Basque_, 73, 74

_Peninsular War, the_, 17, 64, 65, 81

Pepys (Samuel), quoted, 19, 25, 39, 44

Pereda (José María de), 40, 91, 151, 152, 189, 190, 191, 193, 222-238, 242

Pérez Galdós (Benito), 24, 29, 30, 35, 37, 150, 191,
      192, 193, 197, 204, 223, 242

Péroz, _Colonel_, 61

Philip II., _King of Spain_, 165, 246, 248

Philip IV., _King of Spain_, 60

Picón (Jacinto Octavio), 201-202

_Pilgrims_, 61, 62, 76, 147

Pino, 138

Place-names, 64, 65, 68, 78, 85, 86

_Politics_, 28, 35, 212

Pomponius Mela, quoted, 86

_Post_, 56, 59

Prim (Juan), _General_, _Conde de Reus_, 198

_Processions_, 87, 127, 133

_Proverbs_, ix, 26, 28, 29, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 39,
      40, 63, 69, 72, 79, 93, 121, 145


Q

Quevedo [Francisco Gómez de Quevedo y Villegas], 29, 39, 144, 148, 150, 242


R

Reclus (Elisée), quoted, 21

_Religion_, 38, 39, 40, 44, 76, 80, 147, 200

_Roads_, 50, 51, 52

Romayquia, _Queen_, 101

Roncesvalles, 62

Ruiz (Juan), 39, 142, 150


S

Sagunto, 160

Saint-Jean-de-Luz, 57, 60, 62, 64, 78

Saint-Pée, 78

Salamanca, 87, 164-168, 173-175, 181-183

Sánchez (Tomás Antonio), 154

San Feliú de Guixols, 104

Sanguesa, 84

San Sebastian, 63

Sansol, 83

Santa Cruz (Manuel), 210, 211

Santander, 91, 224, 232-233

Santiago de Compostella, 61, 62

Santillana, _Marqués de_ [Iñigo López de Mendoza], 142, 143

San Vicente, 107

Sare, 64, 78

Scaliger, quoted, 60

Scott (_Sir_ Walter), 185

Segovia, 87

_Serenos_, 111, 188

Seville, 88, 90, 125-133, 187, 188

Shakespeare, quoted, 29, 41, 149, 246

Sierra de Jaen, 139

Sierra Nevada, 117, 118, 138, 139, 141

Sitges, 106

_Smuggling_, 57, 58, 77, 205

_Socialism_, 27

Socoa, 65

_Song of Solomon, the_, 166, 175

Sorolla (Joaquín), 205

Stendhal [Henri Beyle], 189, 192

Strabo, quoted, 98


T

Tagus, the, 54, 161, 202-203

Talavera, 90

Tannenberg (Boris de), 151, 223, 237

Tarifa, 118

Tarragona, 107

Teresa, Santa, 25, 148, 183

Theotocopuli (Dominico). _See_ Greco.

_Threshing_, 72, 82

Ticknor (George), quoted, 52 149, 163

Tiepolo (Paolo), quoted, 19

Tintoretto, 255

Titian, 245, 254

Toledo, 87, 90, 91, 155, 240, 244-258

Torrevieja, 113-114

Townsend (Joseph), quoted, 31

_Translations_, 241-242

_Travelling_, 47-56

_Turroneros_, 102


U

Unamuno (Miguel de), 212

Urrobi, 81

Urrugne, 61

_Usury_, 95, 100, 203, 217


V

Valencia, 90, 91, 115, 120, 160, 161, 205, 206

Valencia Island, 86

_Valencians_, 25, 26, 122

Valera (Juan), 150, 191, 193-195, 212, 242

Valle-Inclán (Ramón del), 205, 208, 210, 211, 217-221, 242-243

Vega (Lope Félix de), 33, 149

Velázquez [Diego Velázquez de Silva], 60, 144, 248, 253, 254

Vera, 58, 64, 78

Vézinet (F.), 214

_Villages_, 48, 80, 83, 92, 94, 100, 107, 135, 138, 229

Villanueva y Geltrú, 106

Vinson (Julien), 71

Vizcaya, 60, 63, 68, 76, 78

Voltaire, quoted, 73

_Vulgate, the_, 166, 167, 176-177


W

Webster (Wentworth), 71

Wellington, _the Duke of_, 17, 78

_Whale-fishing_, 63, 225

_Witches_, 231

_Women, influence of_, 40

Wordsworth (William), quoted, 76, 77

Wynn (Sir R.), quoted, 30, 60


Z

_Zagal, the_, 51

Zola (Émile), 207, 222, 238

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SPANISH SERIES.

Edited by ALBERT F. CALVERT.

A Series dealing with the Arts of Spain.

Crown 8vo. Gilt Top. Price 3_s._ 6_d._ net.


TOLEDO                       with 510 illustrations.

MADRID                        “   453       “

SEVILLE                       “   300       “

MURILLO                       “   165       “

CORDOVA                       “   160       “

EL GRECO                      “   136       “

VELAZQUEZ                     “   136       “

THE PRADO                     “   220       “

THE ESCORIAL                  “   278       “

SCULPTURE IN SPAIN            “   140       “

VALENCIA AND MURCIA           “   300       “

ROYAL PALACES OF SPAIN        “   164       “

SPANISH ARMS AND ARMOUR       “   386       “

LEON, BURGOS AND SALAMANCA    “   462       “

CATALONIA AND BALEARIC
ISLANDS                       “   250       “

VALLADOLID, OVIEDO, SEGOVIA,
ZAMORA, AVILA
AND ZARAGOZA                  “   413       “

“Mr. A. Calvert’s Spanish Series will be heartily welcomed by all
students of Spanish Art, for it is not too much to say that never before
has an attempt been made to present to the public so vast a number of
reproductions from quite acceptable photographs of Spanish Works of Art
at so low a price.”--_World._

“Every volume in the Spanish Series has taught us to expect a high
standard of excellence.”--_Daily News._

“...Calculated to give English readers a most comprehensive survey of
this fascinating land, and to convey a clear idea of its historic
greatness. The get-up of the books is in every way worthy of a series of
this magnitude.”--_Sketch._

       *       *       *       *       *

MOORISH REMAINS IN SPAIN

     BEING A BRIEF RECORD OF THE ARABIAN CONQUEST AND OCCUPATION OF THE
     PENINSULA, WITH A PARTICULAR ACCOUNT OF THE MOHAMMEDAN ARCHITECTURE
     AND DECORATION IN THE CITIES OF CORDOVA, SEVILLE AND TOLEDO, WITH
     MANY COLOURED PLATES, AND OVER 400 BLACK AND WHITE ILLUSTRATIONS,
     DIAGRAMS, ETC., DEDICATED BY PERMISSION TO H.M. KING ALFONSO XIII.
     BY ALBERT F. CALVERT.

Crown 4to. £2 2_s._ net.


PRESS OPINIONS.

“Mr. CALVERT has performed a useful work.”--_Daily Telegraph._

“An excellent piece of work.”--_The Times._

“One of the books to which a simple literary review cannot pretend to do
justice.”--_Spectator._

“The making of this book must surely have been a veritable labour of
love; and love’s labour has certainly not been lost.”--_Pall Mall
Gazette._

“A most gorgeous book.... We cheerfully admit Mr. CALVERT into the ranks
of those whom posterity will applaud for delightful yet unprofitable
work.”--_Outlook._

“A truly sumptuous volume.”--_Nation._

“Mr. CALVERT has given a very complete account of the evolution of
Moresco art.”--_The Connoisseur._

“The occasional delicacy of design and harmony of colour can scarcely be
surpassed ... a valuable and profusely illustrated volume.”--_Guardian._

“It is illustrated with so lavish a richness of colour that to turn its
pages gives one at first almost the same impression of splendour as one
receives in wandering from hall to hall of the Alcazar of Seville: and
this is probably the highest compliment we could pay to the book or its
author.”--_Academy._

“It is impossible to praise too highly the care with which the
illustrations have been prepared.”--_Birmingham Daily Post._

“The best age of Moorish architecture in Spain is shown with remarkable
vividness and vitality.”--_The Scotsman._

“The illustrations are given with a minuteness and faithfulness of
detail, and colour which will be particularly appreciated and
acknowledged by those who are most acquainted with the subject
themselves.”--_Liverpool Post._

“A special feature of a work of peculiar interest and value are the
illustrations.”--_Newcastle Chronicle._

“The Illustrations are simply marvels of reproduction.”--_Dundee
Advertiser._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ALHAMBRA

     OF GRANADA, BEING A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE MOSLEM RULE IN SPAIN FROM
     THE REIGN OF MOHAMMED THE FIRST TO THE FINAL EXPULSION OF THE
     MOORS, TOGETHER WITH A PARTICULAR ACCOUNT OF THE CONSTRUCTION, THE
     ARCHITECTURE AND THE DECORATION OF THE MOORISH PALACE, WITH 80
     COLOURED PLATES AND NEARLY 300 BLACK AND WHITE ILLUSTRATIONS (NEW
     EDITION). DEDICATED BY PERMISSION TO H.M. KING ALFONSO XIII. BY
     ALBERT F. CALVERT.

Crown 4to. £2 2_s._ net.


PRESS OPINIONS.

“Immense collection of fine plates.”--_The Times._

“The standard work on a splendid subject.”--_Daily Telegraph._

“The most beautiful book on the Alhambra issued in England.”--_Sphere._

“May be counted among the more important art books which have been
published during recent years.”--_The Globe._

“One is really puzzled where to begin and where to stop in praising the
illustrations.”--_Bookseller._

“One of the most artistic productions of the year.”--_Publishers’
Circular._

“A remarkable masterpiece of book production.”--_Eastern Daily Press._

“Has a pride of place that is all its own among the books of the
month.”--_Review of Reviews._

“Mr. CALVERT has given us a Book Beautiful.”--_Western Daily Press._

“The most complete record of this wonder of architecture which has ever
been contemplated, much less attempted.”--_British Architect._

“It is hardly too much to say that this is one of the most magnificent
books ever issued from the English Press.”--_Building World._

“A treasure to the student of decorative art.”--_Morning Advertiser._

“It is the last word on the subject, no praise is too
high.”--_Nottingham Express._

“Has in many respects surpassed any books on the Alhambra which up to
the present have appeared in our own country or abroad.”--_El Graduador,
Spain._

“It is one of the most beautiful books of modern times.”--_Ely
Gazette._

       *       *       *       *       *

     STORY OF THE PRINCESS DES URSINS IN SPAIN. By MISS CONSTANCE HILL.
     With 12 Illustrations and a Photogravure Frontispiece. New Edition.
     Crown 8vo. 5_s._ net.

     THE SPANISH CONQUEST IN AMERICA, and its Relations to the History
     of Slavery and to the Government of Colonies. By Sir ARTHUR HELPS.
     Edited by M. OPPENHEIM. Four Volumes. With numerous Maps. Crown
     8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ net per volume.

     COMPANIONS IN THE SIERRA. A Romance. By CHARLES RUDY. With a
     Preface by R. B. CUNNINGHAME GRAHAM. Crown 8vo. 6_s._

     LADY CHARLOTTE SCHREIBER’S JOURNALS: Confidences of a Collector of
     Ceramics and Antiques throughout Britain, France, Germany, Italy,
     Spain, Holland, Belgium, Switzerland and Turkey. From the year 1869
     to 1885. Edited by MONTAGUE GUEST, with Annotations by EGAN MEW.
     With upwards of 100 Illustrations, including 8 in Colour and 2 in
     Photogravure. Royal 8vo. Two Volumes. 42_s._ net.

     THE PAPERS OF WALTER SPENCER STANHOPE, M.P. A Macaroni and his
     kindred. By A. M. W. STIRLING, Author of “Coke of Norfolk and his
     Friends.” With 25 Illustrations, including 1 in Colour and 4 in
     Photogravure. Demy 8vo. Two Volumes, 32_s._ net.

     WILLIAM HARRISON AINSWORTH AND HIS FRIENDS. By S. M. ELLIS. With
     upwards of 50 Illustrations, 4 in Photogravure. Two volumes. Demy
     8vo. 32_s._ net.

     THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY. By HOUSTON STEWART
     CHAMBERLAIN. A Translation from the German by JOHN LEES, M.A.,
     D.Lit. (Edin.). With an Introduction by LORD REDESDALE, G.C.V.O.,
     K.C.B. Two Volumes. Demy 8vo. 32_s._ net.

     THE SPEAKERS OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS from the Earliest Times to the
     Present Day, with a Topographical Account of Westminster at various
     Epochs, Brief Notes on the Sittings of Parliament and a Retrospect
     of the Principal Constitutional Changes during Seven Centuries. By
     ARTHUR IRWIN DASENT, Author of “The Life and Letters of John
     Delane,” “The History of St. James’s Square,” etc., etc. With
     numerous Portraits. Demy 8vo. 21_s._ net.

     CHARLES DE BOURBON, CONSTABLE OF FRANCE: “THE GREAT CONDOTTIERE.”
     By CHRISTOPHER HARE. With a Photogravure Frontispiece and 16 other
     Illustrations. Demy 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._ net.

     MINIATURES: A Series of Reproductions in Photogravure of
     Eighty-five Miniatures of Distinguished Personages, including Queen
     Alexandra, the Queen of Norway, the Princess Royal and the Princess
     Victoria. Painted by CHARLES TURRELL. Folio. The Edition is limited
     to 100 Copies for sale in England and America, and 25 Copies for
     Presentation, Review, and the Museums. Each will be numbered and
     signed by the Artist. 15 Guineas net.

     OTHER PEOPLE: A New Album of Drawings by CHARLES DANA GIBSON. Large
     folio. 20_s._

     STALKS IN THE HIMALAYA: Jottings of a Sportsman-Naturalist. By E.
     P. STEBBING, F.R.G.S., F.Z.S. Author of “Jungle Byways in India.”
     With upwards of 100 Illustrations by the Author and others. Demy
     8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._ net.

     MARGARET OF FRANCE DUCHESS OF SAVOY. 1523-1574. A Biography with a
     Photogravure Frontispiece and 16 other Illustrations and Facsimile
     Reproductions of hitherto unpublished Letters. Demy 8vo. 12_s._
     6_d._ net.

     BALLADS WEIRD AND WONDERFUL: With Designs by VERNON HILL. 21_s._
     net.

     THE VICISSITUDES OF A LADY-IN-WAITING. 1735-1821. By EUGENE
     WELVERT. Translated from the French by LILIAN O’NEILL. With a
     Photogravure Frontispiece and 16 other Illustrations. Demy 8vo.
     12_s._ 6_d._ net.

     CASUALS IN THE CAUCASUS. By AGNES HERBERT. Author of “Two Dianas in
     Somaliland,” “Two Dianas in Alaska,” etc. With Illustrations. Demy
     8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._ net.

     UNDISCOVERED RUSSIA. By STEPHEN GRAHAM. Author of “A Vagabond in
     the Caucasus.” With 24 Illustrations. Demy 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._ net.

     A LIFE OF SIR JOSEPH BANKS, PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY: With
     some notices of his Friends and Contemporaries. By EDWARD SMITH,
     F.R.H.S., Author of “William Cobbett: a Biography,” “England and
     America after the Independence,” etc. With a Portrait in
     Photogravure and 16 other Illustrations. Demy 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._
     net.

     THE WIFE OF GENERAL BONAPARTE. By JOSEPH TURQUAN. Author of “The
     Love Affairs of Napoleon,” etc. Translated from the French by Miss
     VIOLETTE MONTAGU. With a Photogravure Frontispiece and 16 other
     Illustrations. Demy 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._ net.

     NAPOLEON AND KING MURAT 1808-1815: A Biography compiled from
     hitherto Unknown and Unpublished Documents. By ALBERT ESPITALIER.
     Translated from the French by J. LEWIS MAY. With a Photogravure
     Frontispiece and 16 other Illustrations. Demy 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._
     net.

     MADAME DE BRINVILLIERS AND HER TIMES. 1630-1676. By HUGH STOKES.
     With a Photogravure Frontispiece and 16 other Illustrations. Demy
     8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._ net.

     SOPHIE DAWES, QUEEN OF CHANTILLY. By VIOLETTE M. MONTAGU. Author of
     “The Scottish College in Paris,” etc. With a Photogravure
     Frontispiece and 16 other Illustrations and Three Plans. Demy 8vo.
     12_s._ 6_d._ net.

     A QUEEN OF SHREDS AND PATCHES: The Life of Madame Tallien Notre
     Dame de Thermidor. From the last days of the French Revolution,
     until her death as Princess Chimay in 1835. By L. GASTINE.
     Translated from the French by J. LEWIS MAY. With a Photogravure
     Frontispiece and 16 other Illustrations. Demy 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._
     net.

     THE ANARCHISTS: Their Record and their Creed. By ERNEST A.
     VIZETELLY. Author of “Emile Zola, Novelist and Reformer,” etc.,
     etc. With several Illustrations. Demy 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._ net.

     RECOLLECTIONS OF GUY DE MAUPASSANT. By His Valet FRANÇOIS.
     Translated from the French by MINA ROUND. Demy 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._
     net.

     ILLUSTRIOUS AMERICANS IN PARIS. By JOHN JOSEPH CONWAY, M.A. With 32
     Full-page Illustrations. Demy 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._ net.

     LIFE AND MEMOIRS OF JOHN CHURTON COLLINS. Written and Compiled by
     his son, L. C. COLLINS. Demy 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._ net.


           JOHN LANE, THE BODLEY HEAD, VIGO ST., LONDON, W.

       *       *       *       *       *

_FOURTH EDITION_

ORTHODOXY

BY GILBERT K. CHESTERTON

Uniform with “Heretics”

Crown 8vo. 5_s._ net.


PRESS OPINIONS

“Of such verve and spirit that we are carried along before we know where
we are going, but always--essentially--in the right direction. Behind it
is a fine and buoyant spirit, as well as an intelligence that really
illuminates.”--_Westminster Gazette._

“Mr. Chesterton has put the whole force of his character and intellect
into the book.”--_Manchester Guardian._

“Mr. Chesterton’s masterpiece.”--_Daily News._

“Some of the sanest writing Mr. Chesterton has yet done. In effect Mr.
Chesterton is a preacher.... All who would join in the search for
reality can find help in this volume.”--_Pall Mall Gazette._

“Full of freshness and individuality, of a daring directness, and marked
throughout by a neatness of statement.”--_Daily Telegraph._

“What Carlyle would have called a real book or Bible.... Will rank as an
astonishing achievement, and may come to be regarded as an important
modern bulwark of the faith.”--_Nation._

“A brilliant book.... A book inspired throughout with an inherent
originality which glorifies it, and with an obvious sincerity which
justifies it. Mr. Chesterton’s book will stimulate the intellect of
every intelligent reader. Many of his sayings are a joy to the mind, and
his analyses of the differences between Christianity and other religions
is a continual pleasure from the force and originality of the
imagery.”--_Outlook._

       *       *       *       *       *

_FOURTH EDITION_

HERETICS

BY GILBERT K. CHESTERTON

Author of “The Napoleon of Notting Hill.”

Crown 8vo. 5_s._ net.


SOME PRESS OPINIONS

“Thoroughly and exuberantly Chestertonian, bristling with quaint
epigram, droll illustration, and daring paradox, and marked by a
sustained brilliancy of criticism and analysis.”--_World._

“Mr. Chesterton is an original and unconventional thinker. These papers
are in his accustomed vein; bright, whimsical, clever, and
amusing.”--_Daily Telegraph._

“There is here all that joyfulness in action, easy brilliance, and skill
at the presentation of a case which have made this writer so delightful
a controversialist.”--_Daily News._

“Thoroughly sane and virile.”--_Manchester Guardian._

“Passages of marvellous power.”--_Echo._

“Mr. Chesterton’s intellectual gambols are an increasing joy.”--_Evening
Standard._

“The brilliant maker of paradox finds abundant scope for his wayward and
delightful humour in his present volume.... Every page contains some
witty phrase, some daring flight of fancy, or some startling turn of
thought.”--_Graphic._

“A book of gorgeous paradoxes and brilliant epigram.”--_Onlooker._

“A collection of delightful essays bristling with epigrams and flashes
of humour.... A clever, healthy, inspiring book, and will greatly add to
the reputation the author has already won by his ‘Napoleon of Notting
Hill.’”--_Clarion._

“This brilliant book ... scintillating epigram and unorthodox
thought.”--_Weekly Scotsman._

“A volume which makes delightful reading, and the more delightful
because it is impossible to read it without encountering in every
page--in every phrase almost--abundant food for thought ... his
brilliant wit, his verbal and mental agility are as evident as they are
in everything he writes.”--_Newcastle Daily Chronicle._

“Mr. Chesterton is as inimitable, as elusive, as pungent as ever. His
wit plays with unimpaired vivacity, his convictions grow more and more
genuine and surprising.”--_Morning Leader._

       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES:

 [1] The distinction still holds good, and those Spaniards who have
 travelled, _e.g._ to Buenos Aires, differ by a certain practical
 energy and optimism from those who have never left the Peninsula.

 [2] “The Ingenious and Diverting Letters of the Lady----. Travels into
 Spain.” English translation. Second edition. London. 1692.

 [3] Villefranche. “État présent d’Espagne.” 1717.

 [4] Edward Clarke. “Letters concerning the Spanish Nation.” London.
 1763.

 [5] This pessimism “is based on our recent disasters; on the fact that
 we are fallen, a terrible fact in the implacable merciless logic of
 international life; on the momentary lack of will from which we are
 suffering; and on the anachronism of certain vices and ideals which,
 since they can no longer, as in past ages, be excused on the ground
 that other nations share them, seem to show that we are incorrigible.”
 Rafael Altamira, “Psicología del Pueblo Español” (Madrid. 1902), in
 which will be found several of the opinions quoted above.

 [6] “Los Males de la Patria.”

 [7] “Idearium Español.”

 [8] “La Voluntad.” Barcelona. 1902: “La intuición de las cosas, la
 visión rápida no falta, pero falta, en cambio, la co-ordinación
 reflexiva, el laboreo paciente, la voluntad.”

 [9] “Alcalá de los Zegríes.” Madrid. 1910.

 [10] Saints in other countries have carried their heads in their
 hands, but there is a legend of a saint in Spain who, not content
 to walk a league with his head under his arm, continued to talk the
 while without ceasing. He was, no doubt “concealing the poverty of
 his action,” like Bertram dal Bornio, carrying his head “a guisa di
 lanterna” in the Inferno.

 [11] “Comedia Sentimental.” 1909.

 [12] One may apply to it the words of Santa Teresa--

    “Tiene tan divinas mañas
     Que en un tan acerbo trance
     Sale triunfando del lance
     Obrando grandes hazañas.”


 [13] Ford considered the Basque to be as “proud as Lucifer and as
 combustible as his matches,” and there is a proverb, “En nave y en
 castillo no más que un vizcaino.” Cf. Camões. Os Lusiadas:

    A gente biscainha que carece
    De polidas razões e que as injurias
    Muito mal dos estranhos compadece.


 [14] The Castilians, said King James I. of Aragon, are very haughty
 and proud: _de gran ufania e erguylhosos_. In the Lusiads the
 Castilian is “grande e raro.”

 [15] The line of Dante is well known: “l’avara povertà di Catalogna.”
 Napier speaks of “the Catalans, a fierce and constant race.”

 [16] The Gallegan, “o Gallego cauto” and “sordidos Gallegos duro
 bando,” in Camões, ever remains the butt of Spanish wit. The
 inhabitants of the _Montaña_ are considered almost equally dense:
 “El montañés para defender una necedad dice tres” and again “From
 Burgos to the sea all is stupidity.” The Asturian, of the region
 between Galicia and the _Montaña_ has, rather, the reputation of a
 business-like shrewdness, he is the _Astur avarus_ of Martial and
 Silius Italicus; in return for his boast that he has never had any
 infecting contact with the Moors, a proverb says: “El asturiano, loco
 y vano, poco fiel y mal cristiano.”

 [17] “Para cantar los navarros, para llorar los franceses, para pegar
 cuatro tiros los mozos aragoneses.”

 [18] In “El Imparcial.”

 [19] It is true that he was a Spanish Basque and was merely
 reproducing in modern dress the scene in “Don Quixote,” in which the
 Biscayan leaves his mistresses unprotected in their carriage and
 fights in order to show that he is by birth a _caballero_.

 [20] Drunkenness is especially rare in Spain. Their sobriety has been
 made a reproach, as being based on laziness and lack of initiative.
 The second half of their proverb: “Goza de tu poco mientras busca más
 el loco--Enjoy the little you have, and let the fool seek more” is,
 indeed, as foolish as the first half is wise.

 [21] Cf. the “altos pensamientos,” of Quevedo’s famous Pablos of
 Segovia and his father, the barber-thief, and the latter’s remark:
 “Esto de ser ladron no es arte mecánica sino liberal”--the thief’s is
 no base mechanical trade, but a liberal profession.

 [22] “Drudgery they will do none at all.” Sir R. Wynn, “A brief
 relation of what was observed by the Prince’s servants in their
 journey into Spain.” 1623.

 [23] They have that momentary isolated intensity which M. Anatole
 France ascribes to men of action: “Ils sont tout entiers dans le
 moment qu’ils vivent et leur génie se ramasse sur un point. Ils se
 renouvellent sans cesse et ne se prolongent pas.”

 [24] Episodios Nacionales. Narváez. 1902.

 [25] Cf. Joseph Townsend. “A journey through Spain in the years
 1786 and 1787,” 3 vols. London. 1792: “We must not imagine that the
 Spaniards are naturally indolent; they are remarkable for activity,
 capable of strenuous exertions and patient of fatigue.” Another
 noteworthy judgment of the same author concerning the Spaniards is
 that “Their ambition aims in everything at perfection, and by seeking
 too much they often obtain too little.”

 [26] “Non hi ha res al mon que vosaltres non faessetz exir de mesura.”

 [27] “La letra con sangre entra,” is a sad proverb of the Spanish and
 in the modern education of the printed page they are deficient.

 [28] Cf. the sayings, _Poderoso caballero es don Dinero; Dadivas
 quebrantan peñas; Dineros son calidad, etc._ Sancho goes to govern
 the island of Barataria “with a very great desire to make money.” The
 tendency is still to hoard, rather than invest, as did Don Bernard de
 Castil Blazo in _Gil Blas_, keeping 50,000 ducats in a chest in his
 house.

 [29] Spaniards prefer to enjoy time as a gift sent by the gods,
 than to waste it in trying to spend it too nicely. _El tiempo lo da
 Dios; Dios mejora las horas; Con el tiempo maduran las uvas._ To a
 peasant two o’clock on a day of March is “four more hours of sun.”
 Time is not parcelled out mechanically into tiny divisions by clocks.
 Distances are given by hours--an hour to a league. The Catalans are
 less lavish of the minutes; to a stranger asking the distance to a
 village near Tarragona, a peasant answered cannily in Catalan, “un
 cuart y mitj”--that is, the village was a quarter of an hour and half
 a quarter of an hour distant. Curiously the Catalans give the hour as
 in German, _e.g._ half-past eight is _dos cuarts de nou--halb Neun_.

 [30] “El Caballero encantado,” 1909: “Viven en un mundo de
 ritualidades, de fórmulas, de trámites y recetas. El lenguaje se ha
 llenado de aforismos, de lemas y emblemas; las ideas salen plagadas
 de motes, y cuando las acciones quieren producirse andan buscando
 la palabra en que han de encarnarse y no acaban de elegir.” The
 Spaniards speak with conviction of the great gulf fixed between word
 and deed:--_del dicho al hecho hay gran trecho; Los dichos en nos, los
 hechos en Dios_.

 [31] Cf. a speaker in the _Cortes_ in June, 1910: “Aquí no hay nada
 tan alto como las clases bajas.”

 [32] Don Ramiro de Maeztu has written of the aggressive assertion of
 personality--_innecesária afirmación de las personas_--in Spain.

 [33] _Lo que no lleva Cristo lo llera el fisco_--“What the Church
 leaves, the Treasury receives,” says an old proverb.

 [34] An author in Pérez Galdós’ _Fortunata y Jacinta_ says that the
 Spaniards, that _pícara raza_, are unaware of the value of time and of
 the value of silence. “You cannot make them understand that to take
 possession of other people’s silence is like stealing a coin.” “It is
 a lack of civilization.” By such un-Spanish criticisms Señor Pérez
 Galdós betrays the fact that he was not born in Spain.

 [35] The historian, Mariana, displayed more patriotism than accuracy
 when he wrote that Spain “is not like Africa, which is burnt by the
 violence of the sun nor is it assailed, as is France, by winds and
 frosts and humidity of air and earth.”

 [36] So Fr. Alonso de Espina wrote that, were an Inquisition
 established, “serían innumerables los entregados al fuego, los cuales
 si no fuesen aquí ... cruelmente castigados ... habrán de ser quemados
 en el fuego eterno.” La Fortaleza de la Fe. 1459.

 [37] “This spectacle,” says an admiring Englishman in 1760, “is
 certainly one of the finest in the world, whether it is considered
 merely as a _coup-d’œil_ or as an exertion of the bravery and infinite
 agility of the performer.”

 [38] Yet certainly no Englishman should attend a bull-fight while the
 modern custom prevails of leading out a cruelly gored horse, sewing
 it up, and bringing it in again for fresh sufferings. This is done to
 save the contractors of the _plaza_ a few shillings and is a disgrace
 to Spain. Those who have not seen a bull-fight and can scarcely
 believe that so sordid and outrageous a practice is possible may, if
 they have the courage, read all the details in Señor Blasco Ibáñez’
 novel _Sangre y Arena_ (1908).

 [39] The Inquisition was a tyranny universally feared, though in
 principle supported by the people. In Pepys we read of “the English
 and Dutch who have been sent for to work (in the manufacture of
 certain stuffs) being taken with a Psalm-book or Testament and so
 clapped up and the house pulled down; and the greatest Lord in Spayne
 dare not say a word against it if the word Inquisition be mentioned.”
 Cf. the groundless terror of the old woman in Quevedo’s _El Buscón_,
 or the story of the man who, when asked for a few pears by an
 Inquisitor, pulled up and presented him with the whole tree. Attacks
 on and ridicule of priests in Spain are not exclusively modern; the
 following verse of Juan Ruiz (14th century) is but one of countless
 instances throughout Spanish literature:

    “Como quier que los frayles et clerigos disen que aman a Dios servir
     Si barruntan que el rico está para morir
     Quando oyen sus dineros que comienzan a retenir
     Qual de ellos lo levará comienzan luego a rennir.”

 But recently the number of those believing in religion has diminished,
 and the anti-Clericals have been driven by certain abuses of the
 Church to a more or less crude parade of atheism. It is felt that
 the Church has crushed life rather than sought its fuller, nobler
 expression. Thus a writer, E. L. André (“Ética Española,” 1910), says:
 “We conceive life solely as a preparation for death,” and speaks of
 the slight _espíritu territorial_ possessed by Spaniards. Cf. Berceo,
 in the 13th century: “Quanto aquí vivimos en ageno moramos”--our life
 on earth is a sojourn in a strange land.

 [40] Honesty is a common attribute of Spaniards, but they have perhaps
 no very accurate regard for the value of truthfulness or honesty in
 words.

 [41] _La mujer y el fraile mal parecen en la calle._ In the South,
 as at Seville, the percentage of women to be seen in the streets is
 noticeably small.

 [42] “El consejo de la mujer es poco,” said Sancho, “y el que no lo
 toma es loco.” The women maintain their influence, but it is thus not
 properly their own, but rather that of the Church.

 [43] The phrase _Seguir sin novedad_ is still used to imply that
 everything is going on well. But an ever-increasing number of
 politicians are now advocating “new things” with a somewhat crude
 violence. It is a reaction against the apathy that waited with crossed
 hands--

    “Vuolsi così colà dove si puote
     Ciò che si vuole, e più non dimandare.”


 [44] Cf. the characteristic trait mentioned by Samuel Pepys: “They
 will cry out against their King, and Commanders, and Generals, none
 like them in the world, and yet will not hear a stranger say a word of
 them but will cut his throat.”

 [45] It is true, however, that the mass of the Spanish nation has
 still to develop on really Spanish lines: hence its present weakness
 and its potential strength in the future, when a civilization of a
 truly national character shall have imposed itself upon the artificial
 civilization of culture imported from France, and religion imported
 from Rome.

 [46] The ethereally lovely Cathedral of León is more remote.

 [47] Some of the secondary roads of Andalucía are excellent, and
 motorable, though narrow. But between the roads of most provinces
 there is little to choose. No wonder that there is in Spain a saint
 invoked as the protector of “way-farers and the dying.” Ford remarked
 that while the rest of Spain calls the Milky Way “the road to
 Santiago,” the Gallegans themselves know better, and call it “the road
 to Jerusalem.” The roads from small towns to their stations, at charge
 of the _municipios_, are notably bad, and amaze the newly arrived
 foreigner. But, indeed, the roads in the immediate neighbourhood of
 such important industrial cities as Valencia and Barcelona are often
 in a deplorable state, and it is no infrequent sight to see carts of
 fruit or vegetables stuck fast in deep ruts of mud.

 [48] Ticknor, in 1818, speaks of Spain as “a country such as this
 where all comfortable or decent modes of travelling fail,” of the
 “abominable roads,” and of the inns as “miserable hovels,” destitute
 of provisions. A century and a half earlier Mme. d’ Aulnoy said: “You
 enter not any inn to dine but carry your provisions with you.” But the
 centuries pass not for Spanish inns.

 [49] A peasant woman near Almería wore a long yellow and pink
 kerchief, a bright red shawl, light blue bodice, skirt of white and
 mauve, dark blue apron with a white line, red stockings, yellow
 sandals, and carried a second shawl of brilliant orange colour, yet
 all blent harmoniously under the glaring sunlight.

 [50] Especially in the matter of letters, the ignorance, indifference,
 errors, and delays of the officials are, to an Englishman, past
 belief, and not least so at Madrid, where a letter has been kept for
 two months and handed over, after repeated inquiries, with the date of
 the Madrid post-mark, _seventy_ days earlier, clearly visible. Reforms
 are, however, in contemplation. Foreign letters as a rule fare better
 than others. A card posted at Granada on May 15, and a letter posted
 in France on May 26, both arrived at Barcelona on May 27 (1911).

 [51] The former importance of St. Jean de Luz (in Basque Donibane
 Lohitzune) is shown by the lines--

    “Saint Jean de Luz, petit Paris
     Bayonne, son écurie.”

 Similar is the proud boast of Almería:

    “Cuando Almería era Almería
     Granada era su alquería.”

 Victor Hugo quaintly describes St. Jean de Luz in 1843 as “un village
 cahoté dans les anfractuosités de la montagne.”

 [52] English translation of 1692.

 [53] In 1623 Sir R. Wynn describes the country near “Bilbo” as “all
 infinite Rocky, cover’d onely with Furrs and a few Juniper Trees.”

 [54] At St. Jean de Luz, where Louis XIV. was married to the Infanta,
 a house still hears the inscription--

    “L’Infante je reçus l’an mil six cent soixante
     On m’appelle depuis le Chasteau de l’Infante.”


 [55] “Par Vocation.” Paris. 1905.

 [56] “_Vulnerant omnes, ultima necat._--All hours wound, the last
 kills.”

 [57] Cf. Mme. d’Aulnoy: “We were here very well entertain’d so that
 our Tables were covered with all sorts of Wild Fowls.”

 [58] The Basque poem, “_Altabiscarraco Kantua_,” singing of victory,
 was considered magnificent when it was thought to be centuries old,
 and though it has been proved beyond all doubt to be modern, we may
 still venture to consider it to be magnificent: “A cry is heard among
 the Basque mountains, and the Etchecojauna, standing before his door,
 listens and says: ‘What is it? who is there?’ and the dog asleep at
 his master’s feet, rises and fills the region of Altabiscar with his
 barking.” One line is, “_Cer nahi zuten gure menditarik Norteko gizon
 horiek?_--What do these men of the North want in our mountains?” and
 another, “Why have they come to disturb our peace?” The Basques must
 often have asked a like question as they have seen the foreigners of
 younger races crowd around their mountains; but in spite of these
 inroads, the Basques have succeeded in keeping a part of their
 language and customs, like the waters of their proverb which, after a
 thousand years, still run in their old course: “_Mila urthe igaro eta
 ura bere bidean--Después de años mil, vuelve el rio á su cubil_.”

 [59] Rymer, “Foedera.”

 [60]

    SARARI
    BALHOREA
    RENETALE
    YALTASSUN
    AREN SARIA
    EMANA LUIS
    XIV. 1693.

 The words _balhorea_ (valour) and _leyaltassuna_ (loyalty) are typical
 of the absence of truly Basque abstract words.

 [61] The mountain La Rhune or Larrhun, is half in France, half in
 Spain. Its name is Basque, derived from _larre_, pasture, and _on_,
 good (in Navarre there is a river Larron and a village Larraona); but
 the first syllable has become the French article, and a lower flank of
 the mountain is known as “La petite Rhune.”

 [62] Napier, who had no gift of spelling, writes Atchuria, or
 Atchubia. The word means White Rock (_aitz_, rock, and _churi_, white)
 and its Spanish name is Peña Plata, Silver Mountain.

 [63] The badness of their French has been ridiculed in the proverb,
 “Parler français comme une vache (_i.e._ Basque) espagnole.”

 [64] Yet in a codex of the twelfth century occur eighteen Basque
 words, all of which, except four, are still used, if in slightly
 altered forms. The Basque language gives many proofs of the extreme
 antiquity of the Basques. The words for “knife,” “axe,” etc.,
 are derived from _aitz_, meaning “stone.” The words for “Monday”
 (_astelehena_, “first day of the week”), “Tuesday” (_asteartea_,
 “middle of the week”), “Wednesday” (_asteazkena_, “last of the week”)
 point to a week of three days. The counting is vigesimal: “forty” is
 _berrogoi_ (twice twenty); “sixty,” _hirogoi_ (thrice twenty). The
 word for “twenty,” _hogoi_, has a curious similarity with the Greek
 εἲκοτι and the sheepscoring _gigget_. There are no general terms--no
 word for “tree” (for which _arbola_ is used), but for different kinds
 of trees; no word for “sister,” but for “brother’s sister,” “sister’s
 sister;” and no abstract terms (_karitatea_, _prudentzia_, _etc._,
 being used).

 [65] The best account of the Basques is to be found in the late Mr.
 Wentworth Webster’s “Loisirs d’un Étranger au Pays Basque,” and in
 his “The Basques, the Oldest People of Western Europe;” in M. Julien
 Vinson’s “Les Basques et le Pays Basque” and Francisque Michel’s “Les
 Basques.”

 [66] A French writer, Le Pays, speaks thus of the Basque country in
 the seventeenth century: “La joye y commence avec la vie et n’y finit
 qu’avec la mort. Elle paroist en toutes leurs actions. Les prestres en
 ont leur part aussi bien que les autres. J’ai remarqué qu’aux nopces
 c’est toûjours le curé qui mene le branle.” Another Frenchman of the
 same period says that the Basques of Labourd are “des gens toujours
 fols et souvent yvres.” Similarly, Larramendi says that the Basques
 are “muy inclinados á ver fiestas.”

 [67] Cf. their proverbs, “Lan lasterra, lan alferra--Rapid work, idle
 work;” and “Geroa, alferraren leloa--To-morrow is the refrain of the
 idle.”

 [68] The great game at Irun, between French and Spanish Basques, about
 the year 1840, has become a legend, and is still spoken of by the
 peasants. Gascoña, the chief French player, was offered 10,000 francs
 “pour faire trahison,” but refused, were it ten times the sum. Oxen,
 crops, fields and houses were freely betted. The ball, we are told,
 was slily wetted for service, tintacks were scattered in the court,
 and Gascoña, accustomed to play barefoot, called for a pair of heavy
 wooden _sabots_, and continued the game. The French won, and were
 obliged to escape across the frontier without changing, and _chistera_
 on arm. Those were the times when the peasants left their farms
 to play for the love of the game. To-day the game is in the hands
 of a few professionals, for the benefit of foreigners, the result
 often arranged beforehand. “Aujourd’hui,” said an aged player of the
 frontier, “les joueurs rient quelquefois: nous ne riions pas, nous.”

 [69] Antaño, en los antaños, dans le temps.

 [70] Corografía de Guipúzcoa: “No es creible si no se ve el mucho pan
 y cera que se ofrece.... Además en tales grandes funerales por modo de
 ofrenda se trae á la puerta de la iglesia un buey vivo en unos lugares
 y en otros un carnero también vivo que, acabado el oficio, se vuelve
 á la casería ó carnicería, y por esto se paga al cura una cantidad
 determinada en dinero.” He estimates the house expenses at 500 duros
 (or dollars), and the Church expenses at another 500, truly an immense
 sum for those days. When the burials took place in the church, the
 offerings of bread and wax would be made on the tomb.

 [71] The music and words are by Iparraguirre.

 [72] Sare.

 [73] Urrugne, above the sun-dial on the church.

 [74] Saint Jean de Luz.

 [75] Saint Pée, formerly Stus. Petrus de Ivarren. “There is a little
 village called St. Pé, where I was stopped a day or two by very bad
 weather. I was lodged at the Curé’s, a good old man, from whose
 conversation about the state of France I received light which had
 important results. He was very clever and very well-informed, and took
 not only right, but large views of things.”--_The Duke of Wellington
 to J. W. Croker._

 [76] Near Louhossoa.

 [77] “Remember death.”--Ossès.

 [78] Vizcaya and Guipúzcoa are, with Barcelona and Pontevedra,
 the most densely populated provinces in Spain. The Basques have a
 genius for administration which is not to be found in other parts
 of the Peninsula. Their excellent roads and cleanly kept towns form
 a striking contrast. They have a true love of local independence,
 and in the eighteenth century we find two Basque frontier villages,
 Vera and Sare, styling themselves in a treaty the “two Republics.”
 The treaty concerned Yerbas y Aguas y Bellotas; grass, water and
 acorns. Similarly, to-day, in the Basque provinces groups of small
 villages and houses are joined in free “hermandades,” “universidades,”
 “anteiglesias,” “valles.” The few privileges that remain are jealously
 guarded. The Navarrese will tell you with pride that theirs is the
 only province where a man is allowed to find a substitute in the
 conscriptions.

 [79] The Spanish Premier himself has said in the Senate (October,
 1910), that if the Basque Provinces are more advanced than other parts
 of Spain this is due not to their merits, but to the favouritism of
 governments. A knowledge of the Basques, however, hardly warrants this
 statement. Since the abolition of the _fueros_, says the late Mr.
 Butler Clarke, in “Modern Spain,” “their efforts are restricted to
 making the administration of their provinces a model for the rest of
 Spain.”

 [80] The Basques took their revenge by the hand of M. l’Abbé d’Iharce
 de Bidassouet. In his “Histoire des Cantabres,” tom. I. Paris, 1825
 (vol. ii. was not published), he derives all names of places from
 Basque, as the original language of the world. “Je ne serai pas assez
 hardi,” he says, “pour soutenir que le Père Éternel parlât basque,”
 but he is really convinced that it is so. L’Andalousie, with the help
 of the article, he derives from two Basque words, “landa lusia,” long
 land. Versailles is a Basque word, so is Athens, so is Helicon. Norway
 puzzles him for a moment, but soon with the remark that “Norvège
 est un mot altéré et corrompu,” he tosses it aside and proceeds on
 his reckless etymological course. Certainly to the irresponsible
 philologist Basque offers a delightful field. For instance, the name
 of the desolate salt lake of Kevir in Persia has been derived from a
 word “gavr” or “gav” (“hollow,” “depression”). In Basque “gabe” means
 without, and the word for night is also “gabe” (no doubt as being a
 hollow without light). Then we have the Gaves, de Pau, d’Oloron, etc.;
 the Spanish “gaveta” (a pigeonhole), “gavia” (pit dug for planting a
 tree); “cavus,” “cave” and so forth. But to draw inferences as to the
 origin of the Iberians, as to whether the same or different peoples
 inhabited the Caucasus and the Pyrenees, or even as to whether “le
 Père Éternel parlât Basque,” is a very different matter, beset with
 pitfalls innumerable.

 [81] See Wentworth Webster, “Les Loisirs d’un Étranger au Pays
 Basque.” 1901. This was a common practice of the Romans who, meeting
 words so rough and horrid to their Latin pronunciation in the land of
 the Basques, “quorum nomina,” according to Pomponius Mela, “nostro
 ore concipi nequeunt,” would smooth and round these names and give
 them a Latin derivation. The Spaniards may have done the same in the
 case of Valencia Island, Co. Kerry. The form in old maps is Ballinish
 (_Innish_, “island,” and _ball_, “home” or perhaps “mouth”--the
 harbour the mouth of the island), and the peasants still pronounce the
 name Valinch.

 [82] Yet those who connect Barcelona with the smoke and gloom of an
 industrial city, having heard it spoken of as the Manchester of Spain,
 are mistaken. Barcelona is still worthy of the praise of the Venetian
 ambassador in the sixteenth century, who called it a “bellissima
 città,” with “copia di giardini bellisimi,” and of the praises of
 Cervantes in “Don Quixote,” and in “Las Dos Doncellas,” where it is
 the “flower of the beautiful cities of the world and an honour to
 Spain.”

 [83] “España: Hombres y paisajes.” 1909.

 [84] A Spanish proverb says: “When it rains, it rains; when it snows,
 it snows; but ’tis bad weather when it blows.” Agriculture in many
 parts of Spain is literally “ἀπάνευθεν ἐπ’ ἀγροῦ πήυατα πάσχειν--to
 suffer woes apart upon the land.”

 [85] Cf. Pío Baroja, “César ó Nada.” Madrid, 1910: “Hay una hora
 en estos pueblos castellanos, adustos y viejos, de paz y serenidad
 ideales. Es el comenzar de la mañana. Todavía los gallos cantan, las
 campanadas de la iglesia se derraman por el aire y el sol comienza
 á penetrar en las calles en ráfagas de luz. La mañana es un diluvio
 de claridad que se precipita sobre el pueblo amarillento. El cielo
 está azul, el aire limpio, puro y diáfano; la atmósfera transparente
 no da casi efectos de perspectiva, y su masa etérea hace vibrar
 los contornos de las casas, de los campanarios y de los remates de
 los tejados. El viento frío y sutil juega en las encrucijadas y se
 entretiene en torcer los tallos de los geranios y de los claveles
 que llamean en los balcones. Hay por todas partes un olor de jara y
 de retama quemada que viene de los hornos donde se cuece el pan, y
 un olor de alhucema que viene de los zaguanes.” Castille has been a
 little neglected by the novelists in comparison with other regions.
 But recently Ricardo León (in “El Amor de los Amores,” 1910), has
 sung the praises of the _ancha, heróica tierra de Castilla_, its
 austere simplicity and strength, its serene atmosphere, its golden
 crops, its flocks of sheep, clear streams, thyme-scented solitudes,
 and far horizons. And _Azorín_, in a short study, “En la Meseta” (_La
 Vanguardia_ of Barcelona, January 4, 1911), as in his books “España,”
 “El Alma Castellana,” “Los Pueblos,” skilfully portrays the inner
 spirit of Castille: “Por la ventana se columbra un paisaje llano,
 seco, desmantelado; á lo lejos se divisan unas montañas con las cimas
 blanqueadas por la nieve.... Todo el silencio, toda la rigidez, toda
 la adustez de esta inmoble vida castellana está concentrada en los
 rebaños que cruzan la llanura lentamente y se recogen en los oteros
 y los valles de las montañas. Mirad ese rabadán, envuelto en su capa
 récia y parda, contemplando un cielo azul sin nubes, ante el paisaje
 abrupto y grandioso de la montaña, y tendréis explicado el tipo del
 campesino castellano castizo, histórico: noble, austero, grave y
 elegante en el ademán, corto, sentencioso y agudo on sus razones.”

 [86] Señor Gasset, Minister of Public Works, now proposes (in a scheme
 explained to the Congress on March 9, 1911) to spend twenty-seven
 million _pesetas_ on afforestation in ten years.

 [87] Martial, referring to the frequency of winds of Spain, says--

    “Debes non aliter timere risum
     Quam ventum Spanius.”


 [88] El Conde Lucanor, “Enxemplo 30:” “...el rey Abenabet de Sevilla
 era casada con Romayquia et amábala muy mas que á cosa del mundo, et
 ella era muy buena mujer, et los moros han della muy buenos enxemplos:
 pero una manera habia que non era muy buena, esto era, que á las
 vegadas tomaba algunos antojos á su voluntad. Et acaesció que un dia,
 estando en Córdoba en el mes de febrero, cayó una nieve, et cuando
 Romayquia esto vió comenzó á llorar, et el rey preguntóle porque
 lloraba, et ella dijó que porque nunca la dejaba estar en tierra que
 hubiese nieve. Et el rey, por le facer placer, fize poner almendrales
 por toda la tierra de Córdoba, porque pues Córdoba es tan caliente
 tierra et non nieva y cada año, que en el febrero paresciesen los
 almendrales floridos et le semejasen nieve, por le facer perder aquel
 deseo de la nieve.”

 [89] George Eliot, “The Spanish Gypsy.” The purple shadows are the
 effect of dark patches of rock seen through the transparent blue water.

 [90] “_Papel y tinta y poca justicia_, paper, ink, and little
 justice,” say the people, in one of their proverbs. They feel that,
 in Spain, if revenge is a kind of wild justice, so too frequently is
 justice.

 [91] Barretti’s Dictionary (edition of 1778) quaintly renders
 _socarrón_ as “a crafty, subtle fellow; an arch wag.”

 [92] On the road from Tortosa to Valencia there is a stone cross with
 the pathetic, ill-spelt inscription: “Aqui murió instantáneamente al
 tirarse del carro por habersele desembocado el mulo Domin^{co} Cugat
 Jardi el 30 agosto de 1894. R.I.P. Carrateros ya veis lo que paso este
 infelis.” “Carters, you see what happened to this unhappy man.” But
 the carters throughout Spain continue to sleep away the long hours of
 the road.

 [93] The latest statistics available show that, while 90 and 80 per
 cent. of the electors in some northern provinces of Spain can read and
 write, in Andalucía the highest averages are 51 and 50 (provinces of
 Cadiz and Seville), that of the province of Córdoba being but 41, of
 Almería 38, of Granada and Jaen 35, of Málaga 34.

 [94] “Chapters on Spanish Literature.” 1908.

 [95] “N’uma mão a penna e n’outra a lança.”

 [96] M. Boris de Tannenberg, speaking of “Sotileza,” has said
 excellently: “C’est que plus une œuvre a un caractère local marqué,
 plus elle a de chance de devenir universelle, à condition que
 l’écrivain, sous la particularité des mœurs et du langage, ait pénétre
 jusqu’au fond commun d’humanité.” And Don Marcelino Menéndez y Pelayo,
 who represented King Alfonso on January 23, 1911, in the ceremony of
 unveiling at Santander the statue of Pereda by Señor Collaut Valera
 (nephew of the novelist, Juan Valera), said in his speech: “His
 books, so local that even the inhabitants of the mountain require a
 glossary, and as Spanish as the most Spanish writings since Cervantes
 and Quevedo, are profoundly human owing to the intensity of life which
 they contain, and the quiet majesty with which it is developed.”

 [97] We are apt to forget that men in the Middle Ages, if they dwelt
 insistently on the sinister “Dance of Death,” also felt to the full
 the joys of living. The “Poema del Cid” sings no variations on the
 theme “How good is man’s life, the mere living,” but the feeling
 itself appears in every line.

 [98] The King had sent “letters to León and Sanctiague, to Portuguese
 and Galicians, to those of Carrión and the Men of Castille,” to
 announce a _Cort dentro en Tolledo_, in order to judge between the Cid
 and the Counts of Carrión. “Since I was King,” he says, “I have held
 but two _Cortes_, one in Burgos, the other in Carrión, this third in
 Tolledo have I come to hold to-day.”

 [99] James Fitzmaurice-Kelly. “Chapters on Spanish Literature,” p. 231.

 [100] See pp. 151, 222-238. Pereda is, perhaps, the least read outside
 Spain of all Spanish novelists; yet it is scarcely too much to say
 that he who cannot appreciate Pereda cannot understand the spirit or
 feel the true savour of Spain.

 [101] “Chapters on Spanish Literature,” p. 246.

 [102] Andrés González-Blanco, “Historia de la novela en España desde
 el romanticismo hasta nuestros días.” Madrid. 1909.

 [103] La Primera República. Madrid. 1911.

 [104] See page 214.

 [105] Señor Picón, whose writings are rather exquisite than
 voluminous, is the author of “Dulce y Sabrosa,” and several short
 stories. A Spanish critic, Señor Gómez de Baquero, has said of him
 that while “his thoughts look to the future, his style listens to the
 golden music of the past.” His latest work is “Juanita Tenorio,” a
 long novel (published as vol. 3 of his Complete Works in the autumn
 of 1910), in which his art, skilful and delicate as it is, has not
 been entirely successful in eclipsing the sordidness of the subject
 by the magic of the style. The following quotation--a description of
 Madrid seen from an attic-window at night--will give some idea of his
 restrained and clear-cut style: “Era noche cerrada. En primer término
 no percibía la vista más que las grandes masas angulosas y obscuras de
 muros, parodones y tejados: descollando por encima de ellos surgían
 los contornos de torres y campanarios, cuyos puntiagudos chapiteles,
 cubiertos de pizarra, recogían el escaso claror de las estrellas; acà
 y allà rompían la superficie negra de las fachadas los rectángulos de
 luz amarillenta que forman los balcones alumbrados interiormente, y al
 través de algun vidrio brillaba el resplandor solitario de una lámpara
 con su pantalla de color; de las chimeneas salían nubecillas de humo,
 que, flotando como manchas fugaces en la lobreguez del ambiente, se
 desvanecían en la altura; por entre las manzanas de casas, á lo largo
 de las calles rectas, divisabanse las hileras de los faroles, cuyas
 llamas reverberaban en cristales y vidrieras, ó á trechos algún arco
 voltáico irradiaba intenso fulgor blanquecino; y de aquel conjunto de
 sombras esmaltadas de toques luminosos so alzaba el rumor confuso de
 mil ruidos diversos; rodar de vehículos, vocear de vendedores, gritar
 de chicos y cantar de criadas; ya el tecleo de un piano, ya el lento
 sonar de las campanadas de un reloj.”

 [106] “César ó Nada” is the first of a trilogy entitled “Las
 Ciudades”; another trilogy, “El Mar,” is begun with “Las Inquietudes
 de Shanti Andía” (1911), a vivid disconnected narrative concerning
 the lives of adventurous sailors of the Basque coast in the little
 fishing-harbour of Luzaro and in their distant voyages. The style,
 or absence of style, is clear, transparent, as it were brittle with
 the shock of abrupt short sentences, interspersed with sonorous
 Basque names and rough snatches of Basque song. In Basque, too, are
 the indications of the site in which lie buried the coffers of gold
 coins hoarded by a miserly slave trader. But the book ends with the
 sad reflection: “No one now in Luzaro is willing to be a sailor. Los
 vascos se retiran del mar.”

 [107] Six years after Galdós, sixteen before Blasco Ibáñez, one before
 Alas and Picón, and two before Palacio Valdés.

 [108] F. Vézinet, “Les Maîtres du Roman Espagnol Contemporain,” Paris,
 1907.

 [109] Indeed, in reading the more recent novels by Señora Pardo Bazán,
 “La Quimera,” or “La Sirena Negra,” or “Dulce Dueño” (1911), striking
 and original as they are, one cannot help looking back from them
 somewhat regretfully to her Galician novels of the eighties.

 [110] “Le trait essentiel du réalisme de Pereda c’est la sympathie
 avec laquelle il décrit les mœurs populaires, sans optimisme outré,
 mais avec une divination profonde de leur poésie intime. Pereda
 aime le peuple par tempérament d’artiste, pour ce que celui-ci a de
 pittoresque et d’original; il l’aime aussi en homme et en chrétien,
 comme une humanité plus simple, aux sentiments spontanés et naïfs.
 Il ne nous dissimule pas sa grossièreté et ses misères mais il nous
 ouvre les yeux sur ses vertus ignorées; jusque chez les êtres dégradés
 par le vice, il nous montre quelque noble instinct qui survit et se
 réveille à l’occasion. Et ce réalisme, qu’illumine toujours un rayon
 d’idéal, respecte l’homme en le peignant même dans ses vulgarités ou
 ses laideurs.” Boris de Tannenberg. L’Espagne littéraire. Paris, 1903.

 [111] The country between Burgos and the Atlantic, known as the
 “_Montaña_” with Santander for its capital, is a district of
 continuous mountains and hills and steep meadows and maize-fields,
 with scarcely an inch of level ground. The hills far up are covered
 with chestnut and oak, beech, walnut and sycamore; rushing streams are
 hidden in deep wooded clefts, and rough walls of stones divide field
 from field, where the reapers, with difficulty wielding their scythes,
 have but a precipitous foothold. The villages and scattered farms
 are of massive yellow stone, with roofs of deep-brown tiles and wide
 balconies suspended by grey wooden posts from the projecting eaves.

 [112] Even so, however, the clear splendour of the sky of Castille
 must have cast a charm over the place. The dominant impression at
 Madrid to-day is, indeed, that of light and of open spaces, the
 Puerta del Sol in a radiance of sunshine, the Carrera de San Jeronymo
 going off apparently into space, the surrounding country far-seen and
 treeless, the clear blue mountains, and the sky from verge to zenith
 clothed with a brilliance of dazzling light so that “ogni parte ad
 ogni parte splende.”

 [113] “La Montálvez” (1888) and “Nubes de Estío” (1891) are perhaps
 his weakest works. “Nubes de Estío” is rather wearisome till the Duque
 de Cañaveral arrives, “falling like a Jupiter among little gods.” “Al
 Primer Vuelo” (1890) is a novel of the Cantabrian coast, but without
 the full salt and vigour of “Sotileza.”

 [114] M. Boris de Tannenberg speaks of “l’âpre saveur de sa langue, un
 peu rude et fruste, mais solide, musclée et haute en couleur.”

 [115] The difference between these artists in prose may be best
 illustrated by quotation: “El Cura abrió la ventana y miró al cielo.
 Apenas brillaban las estrellas. Estúvose quieto y meditando, con los
 ojos fijos en la sombra de los montes. Bajo la bóveda de la noche,
 todos los rumores parecían llenos de prestigio. El ladrido de los
 perros, el paso de las patrullas, el agua del río en las presas,
 eran voces religiosas y misteriosas, como esos anhelos ignotos que
 estremecen á las almas en su noche oscura.” (Valle-Inclán, “Gerifaltes
 de Antaño.”) Here we have the clear thin outlines, the studied
 restraint of the admirer of El Greco. In the following passage, from
 León’s “Alcalá de los Zegríes,” we find the more sensuous glowing
 imagination of the Andalusian novelist: “Fué Alfonso hacia la ventana
 y apoyó la ardorosa frente en los cristales. Todo era silencio y
 soledad. Las estrellas oscilaban en el cielo; la ancha bóveda, oscura,
 estaba acribillada de lucecillas trémulas. Una fogata brillaba á lo
 lejos en el campo. Y en el silencio grave, en la callada sombra, las
 puertas de bronce del misterio se abrían de par en par.” In the hands
 of both writers Castilian yields a full measure of its magic.

 [116] Señor Cossío published his well-known work, “El Greco,” 2
 tom. Madrid, in 1908. The second volume consists of illustrations
 of El Greco’s pictures; most of the reproductions are, however,
 unfortunately somewhat indistinct. The reproductions from photographs
 in a little book, “El Greco,” by A. F. Calvert and C. Gasquoine
 Hartley. London: John Lane, 1909, are much clearer. The illustrations
 are excellent in “Le Greco.” Par Maurice Barrès et Paul Lafond.
 Paris: Floury, as also those of pictures by El Greco in Herr Meier
 Graefe’s “Spanische Reise,” Berlin, 1910. In October, 1910, appeared
 a short scholarly study, “El Greco en Toledo.” Por Francisco de Borja
 de San Román y Fernández. Madrid: Suárez. It contains eighty-eight
 original documents of great interest, especially the inventory of El
 Greco’s possessions (_vienes_), drawn up by his son, Jorge Manuel, on
 April 12, 1614, five days after El Greco’s death, the discovery and
 publication of which will, as the author says, give intense pleasure
 to all lovers of El Greco. This contains over 100 pictures by El
 Greco (some unfinished), 200 prints, 150 drawings, 15 sketches, 20
 plaster models, 30 models in clay and wax, etc. Among the Greek books
 are Josephus, Xenophon, Demosthenes, Isocrates, Homer, Aristotle’s
 Politics and Physics, the Old and New Testaments, Lucian, Plutarch
 (bite di Plutarco), Æsop, Euripides. The Italian include Petrarca and
 Ariosto, but fifty more Italian books, with seventeen in romance and
 nineteen on architecture, are uncatalogued. The commonest articles
 receive a quaint dignity in the old ringing Castilian, as “quatro
 pares de escarpines” (four pair of socks), “un cajón grande de pino
 con cinco gabetas” (a large chest of pine with five drawers), “una
 alacena de madera grande” (a large wooden cupboard), “una espada y una
 daga con tiros y pretina” (a sword and dagger with their belts).

 [117] Cf. his dispute with the Church of Santo Tomé as to the price of
 “El Entierro,” of which dispute a most interesting account is to be
 found in the documents of Señor San Román’s book.

 [118] The temptation is great to quote the _Coplas_ from beginning to
 end. They have been excellently translated by Longfellow, but all who
 read them in the original will be ready to say with the shepherd of
 Camões: “Quam bem que sôa o verso castelhano.”

 [119] “Son tan disonantes unas de otras que no parecen ser de la misma
 mano” (Jusepe Martínez).

 [120] Or Dominico. Sometimes he signed Domy^{co} or Dom^{co} at
 the end of documents. The fourth letter of the signature (in Greek
 characters) on the “Baptism” in the Prado Gallery has all the air of a
 Greek _eta_.

 [121] Even though the house now known and shown as “la Casa del
 Greco” is not that in which El Greco lived, it occupies very much the
 same open situation; for by the disappearance of the block of houses
 belonging to the Marqués de Villena, El Greco’s landlord, it steps
 into the first place above the river.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Magic of Spain, by Aubrey F.G. Bell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAGIC OF SPAIN ***

***** This file should be named 53001-0.txt or 53001-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/0/0/53001/

Produced by Josep Cols Canals, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
</doc>
<doc id="file28566138" filename="58831-0.txt" parent_folder="History" url="https://www.gutenberg.org/files/58831/58831-0.txt">
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cordova; A city of the Moors, by 
Albert F. Calvert and Walter M. Gallichan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Cordova; A city of the Moors

Author: Albert F. Calvert
        Walter M. Gallichan

Release Date: February 4, 2019 [EBook #58831]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CORDOVA; A CITY OF THE MOORS ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)









                          THE SPANISH SERIES

                                CORDOVA




                          THE SPANISH SERIES

                     _EDITED BY ALBERT F. CALVERT_

                            SEVILLE
                            MURILLO
                            CORDOVA
                            THE PRADO
                            THE ESCORIAL
                            SPANISH ARMS AND ARMOUR

                          _In preparation--_

                            GOYA
                            TOLEDO
                            MADRID
                            VELAZQUEZ
                            GRANADA AND ALHAMBRA
                            ROYAL PALACES OF SPAIN
                            LEON, BURGOS, AND SALAMANCA
                            VALLADOLID, OVIEDO, SEGOVIA,
                              ZAMORA, AVILA, AND ZARAGOZA




                                CORDOVA

                        A CITY OF THE MOORS BY
                         ALBERT F. CALVERT AND
                          WALTER M. GALLICHAN
                        WITH 160 ILLUSTRATIONS

                  LONDON: JOHN LANE, THE BODLEY HEAD
                  NEW YORK: JOHN LANE COMPANY MCMVII




        Edinburgh: T. and A. CONSTABLE, Printers to His Majesty




                                 _To_

                        _THE DUKE OF SOTOMAYOR_

        _Lord High Chamberlain to H.M. the King of Spain, etc._


_My dear Duke,_

_Some of the pleasantest of my many pleasant memories of Spain are
associated with, as indeed they were derived from, the sympathy you have
displayed in my work and the great kindness I ever received from the
Duchess of Sotomayor and yourself. For these, I hope, sufficient
reasons--not as one who seeks to liquidate a heavy debt of hospitality,
but rather rejoices in his obligations--I beg you to accept this
dedication and permit me to associate your illustrious name with this
modest volume._

                                _I am,

                             My dear Duke,

                    Your obliged and ever grateful,

                          ALBERT F. CALVERT._




PREFACE


It would be unnecessary to enlarge upon the reasons for including a
study of Cordova in this series of Spanish Handbooks: indeed a series of
this description would be incomplete without it. The beautiful,
powerful, and wise Cordova,--‘the City of Cities,’ ‘the Pearl of the
West,’ ‘the Bride of Andalus,’ as the Arabian poets have variously named
it,--the ancient capital of Mohammedan Spain, is still one of the most
curious and fascinating monuments of this singularly interesting
country.

Much water has flowed under the sixteen arches of the bridge which spans
the Guadalquivir since ‘Cordova was to Andalus what the head is to the
body, or what the breast is to the loin’; the Moorish city of the thirty
suburbs and three thousand mosques, whose fame once obscured the glory
of ancient Damascus, is no longer the centre of European culture. ‘The
brightest splendour of the world’ has been lost in centuries of neglect
and decay, and the new light of a modern civilisation has not shone
upon the remains of its mediæval grandeur.

But the Cordova of the great Khalif is still the most African city in
Spain; its mosque remains to give us a clearer and fuller idea of the
power and magnificence of the Moors than anything else in the Peninsula,
not excepting even the Alhambra; and in its narrow, uneven streets and
mysterious, silent _patios_, in the gold and crimson of its fragrant
gardens, the student and the artist may find unending interest and
enchantment.

In selecting the illustrations for this book, the authors have
endeavoured to provide both for the antiquary and the lover of the
beautiful; for those whose acquaintance with Spain must be made through
the medium of the printed page, and for those more fortunate readers who
will, we hope, find this book a memento of their wanderings in
Andalusia.

                                                     ALBERT F. CALVERT.
                                                   WALTER M. GALLICHAN.




CONTENTS


CHAP.                                                               PAGE

   I. THE BRIDE OF ANDALUS                                             1

  II. THE MOORISH CAPTURE                                             13

 III. THE OMEYYAD DYNASTY                                             23

  IV. THE BUILDING OF THE MOSQUE                                      42

   V. IN THE COURT OF ORANGES                                         57

  VI. THE SPLENDOURS OF THE MOSQUE                                    65

 VII. THE CATHEDRAL AND CHURCHES                                      75

VIII. THE PALACE OF THE KHALIFS AND THE MOORISH BRIDGE                79

  IX. ILLUSTRIOUS NATIVES OF CORDOVA                                  83

APPENDIX I.--THE GREAT MOSQUE OF CORDOVA                              96

APPENDIX II.--CORDOVA                                                100




ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                PLATE NO.

View of the City and the Bridge south of the Guadalquivir,             1

The Bridge,                                                            2

View of Mosque and Bridge,                                             3

The Iron Mill on the Guadalquivir,                                     4

Promenade of ‘Grand Capitaine,’                                        5

Market Street, or Calle de la Feria,                                   6

Plaza del Triunfo and exterior of the Mosque,                          7

Entrance Gate of the City, the Column of Triumph, and
the Mosque from the Bridge,                                            8

The Column of Triumph,                                                 9

Ancient Arab Tower, now the Church of St. Nicholas de
la Villa,                                                             10

The Tower of San Nicolas,                                             11

Tower of the Cathedral and Patio de Los Naranjos,                     12

View of the Patio de Los Naranjos,                                    13

The Tower of the Cathedral,                                           14

Entrance to the City from the Bridge,                                 15

Public Fountain in the Patio de Los Naranjos,                         16

Women at the Spring,                                                  17

Well in the Patio de Los Naranjos,                                    18

Peasant with his Donkey,                                              19

A Water-Carrier,                                                      20

The Poor Man’s Meal,                                                  21

Muleteers,                                                            22

A Gardener,                                                           23

Girl with a Guitar,                                                   24

A Room in the Provincial Museum: View of the Roman
and Visigoth Section,                                                 25

A Room in the Provincial Museum: View of the Arab
Section,                                                              26

Door of the House of the Innocents,                                   27

The Door of Don Jerónimo Páez,                                        28

The Door of the Foundling Hospital,                                   29

The Tower of Carrahoe,                                                30

Porch of St. Paul,                                                    31

Ancient Arab Walls,                                                   32

Mosaics of the Four Seasons in the House of S.S. Lugue,
Plaza de la Compania,                                                 33

Architectural Parts of the Catholic Basilicas,                        34

Capitals and Fragments of Ornamentation in the Mosque,                35

Architectural Parts of the Catholic Basilicas and other
constructions,                                                        36

Capitals of the Catholic Basilicas preserved in the Mosque,
now the Cathedral,                                                    37

Fragments of the Catholic Basilicas preserved in the
Mosque, now the Cathedral,                                            38

General View of the Choir and High Altar,                             39

Pulpit and Steps of the High Altar,                                   40

Choir Stalls in the Mosque or Cathedral,                              41

Left Side of the Choir Stalls,                                        42

General View of the Choir in the Mosque, or Cathedral,                43

The Bishop’s Stall in the Choir of the Mosque, or Cathedral,          44

Central Nave in the Cathedral,                                        45

Central Nave in the Cathedral,                                        46

Central Nave in the Cathedral,                                        47

Plan of the Mosque in the time of the Arabs,                          48

Plan of the Mosque at the present time,                               49

The Bishop’s Gate,                                                    50

Entrance to the Mosque, called the Gate of Camónigos,                 51

The Tower of La Mala Muerte,                                          52

The Cathedral: View of the Transverse Nave,                           53

North Angle of the Chapel of Villaviciosa,                            54

The Central Nave of the Mosque,                                       55

The Gate of Pardon,                                                   56

The Gate of Pardon,                                                   57

The Gate of Pardon,                                                   58

The Gate of Pardon,                                                   59

Knocker on the Gate of Pardon,                                        60

Principal Nave and Mih-rab of the Mosque,                             61

Entrance to the Chapel of the Mih-rab,                                62

Interior View of the Mosque (from a drawing),                         63

General View of the Interior of the Mosque,                           64

Interior of the Mosque,                                               65

Interior of the Cathedral,                                            66

Interior of the Mosque,                                               67

Interior of the Cathedral,                                            68

General View of the Chapel of Villaviciosa,                           69

Interior of the Mosque,                                               70

Interior of the Mosque,                                               71

Lateral Door of the Mosque,                                           72

The Chapel of Villaviciosa in the Mosque,                             73

Exterior of the Mosque,                                               74

The Mosque--Moorish Portal on the North Side, built
under Hakem III., 988-1001,                                           75

Chapel of Trastamara, south side,                                     76

General View of the Chapel of the Mih-rab,                            77

Façade and Gate of Almanzor,                                          78

The Mosque--Elevation of the Gate of the Sanctuary of
the Koran,                                                            79

Gate corresponding to the Buildings of Al-Hakem II.,                  80

Portal of the Mih-rab,                                                81

Arcade of the Entrance to the Vestibule of the Mih-rab,               82

The Maksurrah (now the Villaviciosa Chapel), left side,               83

Right Lateral Portal, within the Precinct of the Maksurrah,           84

Detail of the Hall of Chocolate,                                      85

Exterior of the Chapel of the Mih-rab,                                86

Detail, Arches of the Mih-rab,                                        87

Detail in the Chapel of the Maksurrah,                                88

Mosaic Decoration of the Sanctuary,                                   89

General View of the Interior of the Chapel of the Maksurrah
and St. Ferdinand,                                                    90

Detail near the Mih-rab,                                              91

Detail of the Interior of the Mih-rab,                                92

Vertical Section of the Dome and Cupola of the Mih-rab,               93

Detail of the Trastamara Chapel,                                      94

Detail of the Higher Part and Roof of the Chapel of St.
Ferdinand,                                                            95

Sections of the Mosque,                                               96

Sections of the Mosque and Cathedral,                                 97

Detail in the Chapel of Trastamara, south side,                       98

Detail in the Angle of the Arch of the Mih-rab, left side,            99

Detail in the Angle of the Arch of the Mih-rab, right side,          100

Detail of the Gate of the Mosque,                                    101

Kufic Inscription of the time of the Khalifate, found in an
Excavation,                                                          102

The Mosque. Kufic Inscription in the Palace,                         103

Arabian Inscriptions,                                                104

Arabian Inscriptions,                                                105

Basement Panel of the Façade of the Mih-rab,                         106

Marble Socle in the Mih-rab,                                         107

Exterior of the Chapel of San Pedro, north side, in the
Mosque,                                                              108

A Gate on one of the lateral sides,                                  109

A Kufic Inscription on the additions made to the Mosque
by order of the Khalif Al-Hakem,                                     110

A Kufic Inscription on the additions made to the Mosque
by order of the Khalif Al-Hakem,                                     111

Capitals. Entrance Arch,                                             112

Detail of a Frieze,                                                  113

Detail of a Cornice,                                                 114

Detail of a Cornice,                                                 115

Eastern Side of the Exterior of the Mosque and Detail,               116

Plan of the Arch and Cupola of the Mih-rab,                          117

Detail of the Portals of the Maksurrah,                              118

Section and Details of the Mih-rab of the Mosque,                    119

Details of the Cupola of the Vestibule of the Mih-rab,               120

The Gate of Pardon                                                   121

The Bishop’s Gate                                                    121

The Mosque.    Detail of the Trastamara Chapel,                      122

The Mosque. The Gate of the Sultan,                                  122

The Mosque. Interior of the Mih-rab,                                 123

The Mosque. Arab Arcade above the First Mih-rab,                     123

Interior of the Mosque,                                              124

Interior of the Chapel of San Fernando,                              125

Gate of the Cathedral,                                               126

Principal Entrance to the Mosque,                                    127

The Mosque. Trastamara Chapel, south side,                           128

Eastern Façade of the Mosque,                                        129

Patio de los Naranjos,                                               130

Calle del Cardinal Herrero,                                          131

Tower of the Cathedral,                                              132

The Mosque. Pulpit of the Angel,                                     133

The Mosque. Pulpit of the Bull,                                      134

Cathedral. Choir Stalls,                                             135

Cathedral. Principal Nave,                                           136

Gate of St. Catharine,                                               137

Altar of San Rafael,                                                 138

The House of Páez,                                                   139

General View of the Roman Bridge and Calahorra over the
Guadalquivir, taken from the Arab Mill,                              140

Calahorra Castle,                                                    141

General View of the Roman Castle of the Calahorra,                   142

Entrance Gate to the Roman Bridge,                                   143

Almodóvar Gate,                                                      144

The Mills,                                                           145

General View and Roman Bridge over the Guadalquivir,                 146

Grating and Court of a Private House,                                147

Avenue of the Grand Captain,                                         148

District and Church of San Lorenzo,                                  149

General View of the Bank and the Roman Bridge over the
Guadalquivir,                                                        150

Interior of the Plaza de Toros,                                      151

Horticultural Gardens,                                               152

The Bank of the Guadalquivir from the Bridge,                        153

General View of Cordova,                                             154

Courtyard of an Inn,                                                 155

A Street and Country Types,                                          156

A Street and Country Types,                                          157

Ancient Receptacle for Water of Medina Az-Zahira,
Tenth Century,                                                       158

Plan of Cordova,                                                     159


Many of the photographs included in this volume, other than those taken
by myself, were supplied by Messrs. Rafael Garzon of Granada, Senan and
Gonzalez of Granada, Hauser and Menet of Madrid, Ernst Wasmuth of
Berlin, publisher of Uhde’s _Baudenkmaeler in Spanien und Portugal_, and
Eugen Twietmeyer of Leipzig, publisher of Junghändel’s _Die Baukunst
Spaniens_, and I take this opportunity of acknowledging their kind
permission to reproduce them in this volume.

                                                               A. F. C.




CORDOVA




I

THE BRIDE OF ANDALUS


An impression of colour, heat, and somnolence grows upon the stranger as
he rambles through the bright alleys and sunlit plazas of Cordova. He
may be neither painter, poet, nor antiquary; yet the opulence of vivid,
almost garish tones, the romance that lingers about the Moorish
courtyards and the perfumed gardens, and the surviving, pervasive
suggestion of age, will stimulate his senses and imagination. For one
who is capable of deeper and more subtle impressions, the old city will
seem as a consummation of desire and a realisation of fanciful dreams.
The spell of Orientalism will hold him; the splendours of _The Arabian
Nights_ will be brought before his vision; and he will conjure shapes of
sultan, wizard, genii, and sage, and see the lovely retinue of fair
women within the palaces of the swarthy potentates.

Music of reed and string will delight his ears; and loitering by the
walls, on the banks of the swirling Guadalquivir, he will hear the
selfsame song of the bulbul which brought joy and sadness to dark,
inscrutable eyes in olden days. He will watch the blue shadows of mosque
and tower, and see the sun lavish gold on roof and turret, while his eye
will be dazzled by the hues of balconies, by the hot geranium, the gay
dabs of drying garments, hanging like flags against the ardent sapphire
of the Andalusian sky.

Framed in the arch of a city gateway, he will see a lovely vista of
vineyard, olive-crowned hillock, and meditative, grey sierra, rising to
the blue.

He will pace the silent square at night, and discourse with Seneca. His
ears will drink in the stoic counsels of Lucan, and his brain will
grapple with the problems laid down by the sagacious Averroes. He will
hear the Moslem call to prayer, and stand to gaze upon the band of the
devout filing into the Mezquita.

Clamours of battle will assail him, the clash of sword and shield will
startle his slumber, and the night will tremble with the triumphant roar
of the fierce, invading Goths. And in hours, fragrant with the scent of
flowers--placid in contemplation of the simple happiness of Cordova’s
youths and maidens in the Court of Oranges--he will weave romances of
the ancient life, when the town was the seat of the cultured, the home
of the arts, and the sanctuary of the pious.

Doubtless the Cordova of to-day subsists like other towns upon the
industry and the commercial energy of its inhabitants. There are shops
and hotels in the streets; there are signs of handicrafts and of common
daily employments. But there is no bustle, no indication of a strenuous
existence for the people, and the siesta is long and undisturbed. There
is a market, but its produce and merchandise do not suggest the wealth
and commerce of earlier days. The _consumo_, or customs officer, levies
his tax upon almost everything which the hard-faring peasants bring into
the town, and we have seen a conflict between one of these officials and
a countryman over a single live pigeon. The peasant questioned the tax,
and the officer explained the case with the flat of his sword-blade.
This incident is characteristic of Andalusia, and perhaps it may throw a
light upon the discontent which is apt, at times, to manifest itself
violently among the agricultural population of Spain.

Certainly there are days of markets and ferias when Cordova arouses
itself, and trains of mules and asses creep into the place, and flocks
may be seen in the streets. Wine, oil, and fruit are produced in the
environs, and grain-crops flourish on the plain. In mediæval times
Cordova was famed for its mart, where silk and grain were sold. The
district still bears repute for its horse-breeding, but the stock has
suffered deterioration through injudicious selection. An anonymous
American writer, who was here in 1831, speaks of the horses of Cordova
as the finest in Spain, and asserts that they are the descendants of the
pure Arabian breed. One still notes many good horses. It is said that
the water from the Guadalquivir is as nourishing for horses as is the
barley of certain districts of Spain.

The banishment of the Moors hastened the decay of Cordova. For a period
the region was almost stripped of its population, and grass grew in the
plazas and patios of the town. To-day the inhabitants number about fifty
thousand, and though Cordova wears an air of lethargy, the grass does
not spring up in the streets. There seems to be just enough human
activity to keep the town alive, and it is not wholly, as Henry O’Shea
described it, ‘a city of the dead.’ A certain measure of prosperity is
assured for Cordova by the attraction of its antiquity, which brings
strangers from many lands to visit the magnificent Mezquita.

The Spaniard is not a passionate enthusiast of modernity. He is
conservative, and zealous and proud of his ancient towns, and it is
quite probable that the bulk of the natives of Cordova prefer that the
atmosphere of the place shall remain mediæval. And we who resort to
Cordova to reflect upon its past grandeur, and to imbue ourselves with
the spirit of the Moorish days, are assuredly satisfied that it has not
been modernised and marred during the years that have intervened between
the great vandalism after the expulsion of the Arabs and the present
time. We are glad to think that all which remains of majesty and beauty
is now carefully cherished and respected.

Toledo and Avila, both Moorish towns, display an austerity fascinating
by reason of its very grimness. Cordova is beautiful by comparison,
partly on account of its situation in a fertile district, and partly
because its houses are white flower-decked, and cheerful in aspect. It
is more voluptuous than these fortified towns of Castile. The climate is
southern, the air softer, and the buildings are less stern in colouring
and less menacing in appearance. In Cordova, flowery courts invite you
with a smile; in Toledo, frowning gates and barred doors forbid your
entrance. Toledo reminds us that the Moors were warriors and conquerors,
bent upon aggression and the extension of territory; in Cordova one
thinks of the race as sages, artists, worshippers, poets, and lovers.
The palm-trees planted by Abd-er-Rahman, ‘The Servant of the Merciful
God,’ the tropical flowers and fruits, the mosque, and the fountains,
give impress of the milder, pacific, quietly joyous life of the Moors.
We recall the words of the wise ruler: ‘Beautiful palm-tree! thou art,
like me, a stranger in this land; but thy roots find a friendly and a
fertile soil, thy head rises into a genial atmosphere, and the balmy
west breathes kindly among thy branches.’

By these signs we learn to love Cordova as the sanctuary of learning and
devotion rather than as the citadel of the valiant. It is essentially
Oriental. Look at the streets--narrow, crooked, and shady, for, having
no horse vehicles, the Arabs had no need for wider thoroughfares. The
roofs of the houses project and screen the alleys from the sun. Cordova
is clean and bright in contrast to Toledo. The streets are free from
garbage; the interiors of the houses are frequently cleansed, and
flowers are grown by rich and poor. Fruits are cultivated in and around
the town, and one may pluck the fig, orange, lemon, date, peach, plum,
pomegranate, strawberry, and almond.

Standing on the massive bridge which spans the Guadalquivir, one looks
upon the mosque, the city walls, and towers of churches. The Campo de la
Verdad forms a broad promontory washed by the river, and we see quaint
Morisco water-mills, and the lever nets of fishermen. There are
seventeen arches to the bridge, which is of Moorish design, standing
upon piles constructed by the Romans. In the distance rises the range of
the Sierra Morena, a savage wilderness of rock, ravine, and crag,
haunted by the boar, deer, and lynx. Winding through rich meadowland,
the Guadalquivir flows, now in swift shallows, and then in slow deeps,
which from certain points of view resemble landlocked pools. The river
is wide, but not of great depth. Its flood is stained brown from the
soil through which it flows, and at times, when the mountains pay their
tribute of swollen streams, the Guadalquivir speeds in a turbid current,
filling its banks to the brim.

There is a lonely majesty about this tawny river which for many leagues
of its course flows through a desolate, deserted plain. It has but few
trees upon its banks; but here and there are stretches of brushwood
tenanted by nightingales. The stork visits the silent reaches to fish
for eels. Upon its brown banks grows the cold grey cactus. The river
breeds barbel, tench, and big eels, and in the summer shad ascend from
the sea.

In Roman times the Guadalquivir was navigable as far as Cordova, but
to-day the channels have silted up. A few salt pools in the plains show
that the sea once covered large tracts of this part of Andalusia. The
river is now tidal for some miles above Seville, and ships of heavy
tonnage can reach that port. In the middle and upper reaches the river
is unfrequented; it waters grassy wastes and fertile vegas, and murmurs
by groves of olives in its course by Andujar and Cordova.

Antillon, a Spanish writer, accuses the Cordovese of ignorance and
coarse manners. We encountered neither of these qualities during our
stay in the old town. Cordova has its mendicants, whose eyes are keen
for the advent of visitors, and the boys are somewhat troublesome in
their voluntary capacity as guides to the sights of the place. But the
natives of Cordova are sedate, picturesque folk, showing no discourtesy
to the stranger, but rather a disposition to assist him.

There are three principal hostelries--the Suiza and the Oriente are the
visitors’ houses; but those who desire a purely Spanish environment may
find quarters at the little Victoria, which has a very charming patio,
gay with flowers. There are several good cafés. For amusement there is
the Grand Teatro, a large house, in which we saw _The Barber of Seville_
performed. There is, of course, a bull-ring, the Plaza de Toros of every
town in Spain. The chief fights are held during the ferias of May and
September.

But Cordova is the town of dreams, memories, and meditations rather than
of exuberant gaiety. It is a Mecca of the artistic and the studious. For
garish pleasure, sparkling society, and excitement one must go to
Seville, Malaga, or Cadiz. There is a serene solemnity in Cordova,
though it is by no means a gloomy city. The mosque is the attraction and
the wonder of the city, and sacred temples do not dispose to hilarity.
Cordova is eloquent of the gorgeous, heroic past, and its stones contain
sermons upon human destiny and the insecurity of empires. It is a
garden city, antiquated, improgressive, tenacious of the ancient spirit,
and abounding in beauty of form and colour.

Cordova contains only the remnants of its pristine magnificence, but
these are marvellous and precious. The city once boasted of fifty
thousand resplendent palaces, and a hundred thousand inferior houses.
Its mosques numbered seven hundred, and the cleanly Moors built nine
hundred public baths. The city stretched for ten miles along the banks
of the Guadalquivir, flanked with walls, battlements, and towers, and
approached by guarded gates. The common folk spoke in phrases of poetry;
there were no illiterates. Art in every branch flourished in the city;
there were hosts of craftsmen working in brass, gold, and clay. The
libraries were huge, and hither came men of science, philosophers,
poets, and students of all subjects to glean from the store of the
world’s accumulated thought.

Throughout Europe the mention of Cordova brought yearning to the hearts
of the cultured and studious, and men suffered hardship and stress to
pay pilgrimages to this source of learning. Many who journeyed hither
echoed the words of Ibn Sareh, the poet, which he uttered upon entering
the seat of wisdom: ‘God be praised; I am in Cordova, the abode of
science, the throne of the Sultans!’ Seville was ‘the gem,’ ‘the pearl’
of Andalusia; Cordova was called ‘the Bride.’ El-Makkari, the Moorish
chronicler, rehearses many of the poetical tributes paid by Moslem
writers to the splendid city. Setting forth the culture of the city, he
adds, in one place: ‘The Cordovans were further celebrated for the
elegance and richness of their dress, their attention to religious
duties, their strict observance of the hours of prayer, the high respect
and veneration in which they held their mosque, their aversion to wine
and their destruction of wine-vases wherever they found any, their
abhorrence of every illicit practice, their glory in nobility of descent
and military enterprise, and their success in every department of the
sciences.’

Such were the inhabitants of Cordova at the time when the city was the
great capital of the Mohammedan empire. Seville and Toledo yielded
pre-eminence to Cordova, and men spoke in veneration of its four great
wonders: the immense and gorgeous mosque, the bridge over the
Guadalquivir, the city of Ez-Zahra, situated in the suburbs, and the
sciences which were studied in the colleges.

When we read the ancient annals and grow absorbed by the story of
Cordova’s past, we can scarcely realise that the town and its inmates
were real things. The place and the people seem to belong to the realm
of fairy romance; the city seems one of dreams, and the natives pass as
in a pageant of the imagination. And yet we may enter the sacred
mih-rab, commune with the ghosts of warrior and philosopher, and stand
where Tarik stood when he wrested the prized capital from the Goths.

Tangible evidence of a superb civilisation surrounds us in Cordova. We
see examples of early Moorish architecture brought to its highest
artistic manifestation in the mosque. We listen in vain for the voices
of teachers, the song of the singers and poets, and the call of the
muezzin to devotion; but we tread in the footsteps of the long-vanished
Moor, and read his story in the noble lines, chaste embellishments, and
gorgeous details which his skilful hands produced.




II

THE MOORISH CAPTURE


Probably a city of the Carthaginians once stood upon the ground now
covered by Cordova. Phœnicians, Greeks, Trojans, and Tyrians battled in
their day for the rich spoil of Spain, and the armies of Carthage
ravaged the whole of the country. Rome wrought the downfall of the
Carthaginian dominion in Bœtica (Andalusia) and Lusitania (Spain). In
A.D. 205 the Romans began to lay hands on the Iberian Peninsula, and
after long strife they conquered all the land save the territory of the
indomitable Basques of the rocky north.

At Corduba (Cordova) the Romans established a capital of Hispania
Ulterior, and the city was one of importance and prosperity. Under Cæsar
it became the chief town of Bœtica. According to Plutarch, the
government of Spain was given to Julius Cæsar after his prætorship, and
he ruled firmly and justly over Portugal and Andalusia. The conquering
emperor resided in Corduba, and it was here that he was first attacked
with epilepsy.

Beneath the rule of Rome Andalusia prospered. Roads, bridges, and
aqueducts were constructed; cities were enlarged and founded, industries
were developed, and the wealth of the country increased. This spell of
peace and progress was broken by the conflict between Cæsar and Pompey,
and Spain was the scene of some of their fiercest battles. With the
decay of Roman greatness and valour, Bœtica was overrun by the hosts of
the Goths from northern and eastern Europe. Like beasts of prey these
hordes despoiled the Roman cities, shattering temple and amphitheatre,
and laying waste fertile farms and abundant orchards. Rome yielded its
last hold upon fair Bœtica; the Goths seized upon the land, and split it
up into territories ruled by warriors. The invaders were ruthless in
their destruction; they aimed at removing every trace of the Roman
civilisation, and unfortunately they were successful in accomplishing an
almost universal demolition of building, monument, and statue.

Cordova was one of the residences of the Gothic kings. It was known as
Kordhobah among the Goths. There is little doubt that it was a city of
considerable opulence; for when it was sacked by the Moors it yielded
gorgeous robes, embroidered with gold flowers, fine chains of gold,
strings of pearls, and quantities of emeralds and rubies. The sway of
Ludherick, or Roderick, King of the Goths, was first menaced by Tarif
the Berber. Roderick was in dispute with the Lord of Ceuta, a city on
the Strait of Gibraltar, and this quarrel exposed him to the attack of
the covetous territory-hunters of northern Africa.

While Roderick and the Lord of Ceuta contended, Tarif, the redoubtable
leader of the Berber army, landed in Spain, with a force of one hundred
cavalry and four hundred foot-soldiers. Tarif appears to have solicited
reinforcements, in order to meet the Goths at better odds. A force under
Tarik was then sent by Musa Ibn Noseyr, with the object of capturing
Andalusia. As Tarik was crossing the sea, he beheld an apparition of
Mohammed, surrounded by armed Arabs. The Prophet bade the General take
cheer, saying: ‘Take courage, O Tarik, and accomplish what thou art
destined to perform.’ The vision was accepted by the anxious Tarik as an
omen of victory. He rallied his soldiers, and marched upon Cordova,
which was the royal citadel of Roderick. The Gothic king, upon the
tidings of the invasion, came from the north with his army to the
capital, and commanded his officer Theodemir to advance and encounter
Tarik.

Roderick was at this time striving with the sons of Witiza, the
preceding monarch, for his claim to certain territories. Count Julian
and Bishop Oppas sided with the princes, and a large number of the
people stood to their cause. The advent of the forces of Musa served as
an opportunity for the sons of Witiza to strike a blow at Roderick,
their powerful enemy. They decided to join the army of Tarik, and to
oppose the Gothic rule.

The combined hosts of Tarik and the sons of Witiza encamped to the south
of Cordova, after taking Algeciras. Meanwhile the Moorish commander
wrote to his superior for more troops, for Roderick boasted of a large
and valorous following. The great encounter between the Goths and the
Moors was enacted on the plain of Guadalete. Roderick came to the field
in a litter, carried by two mules, and over his head was a brilliantly
jewelled canopy. Aided by the disaffected princes and their adherents,
Tarik made a terrific onslaught upon the ranks of the Goths. It has
been recounted by Moorish historians that Tarik himself went into the
thick of the fight, and killed Roderick with his sword. This account is,
however, doubted by El-Makkari, who asserts that after the battle
Roderick could not be found alive or dead.

The victory was mighty and complete for the Moors. Upon the news of
Tarik’s success, his compatriots began to pour into the country, for the
purpose of colonisation, and in the expectation of enrichment in a land
which had yielded fortune to Carthaginian, Roman, and Visigoth. But
Cordova was still secure in the keeping of the Christians, though
Roderick had been defeated. Naturally the victorious Tarik yearned to
win fresh laurels, and his design was upon the great capital of the
Goths, the remaining stronghold of the routed defenders of Bœtica.

The general selected for the attack upon Cordova was Mughīth Ar-rumi. At
the direction of Tarik, this warrior rode, with seven hundred horsemen,
to lay siege to the city. Some of the Moorish chroniclers state that
Tarik himself led the expedition against the capital; but Mughīth
appears to have been the leader upon whom the conduct of this important
movement fell.

Advancing within a short distance of Cordova, the force encamped in a
forest, and remained cautiously in hiding. At this time many parts of
Andalusia, which are now wholly bare of trees, were well wooded. The
foolish destruction of the forests came later, under the Christian rule,
the reason for the wholesale felling of timber being that trees harbour
birds, and that birds feed upon seed and grain.

Concealed in a dense pinewood, Mughīth Ar-rumi saw the coveted city
almost within his grasp. But the walls were high, stoutly fortified, and
formidable, and the defenders were reputed valiant and stubborn. Scouts
from the Moorish army were sent to view the defences of the city. They
met a shepherd, and from him they extracted the intelligence that the
chief residents of Cordova had quitted, and fled to Toledo for
protection. By threat or bribe, the spies also gathered from the
shepherd that there was one weak spot in the city walls. With this
information they returned to the ambush, and acquainted Mughīth with
that which they had learned.

The Moorish commander bade his warriors prepare for a night attack upon
the city. Darkness and a heavy shower of hail favoured the stealthy
approach of the horsemen to the walls, the hail drowning the sound of
the horses’ hoofs. A halt was called. Mughīth ordered an inspection of
the walls, enjoining a close watch for sentries. The advance party
reported that no sentinels were to be seen at their posts, and that the
city seemed deep in slumber. Upon this the shepherd quietly conducted
the soldiers to the weakest point of the embattlements, where grew a big
fig-tree. One of the Moors clambered into the topmost branch of the
tree, and contrived to gain the summit of the city wall. Unrolling the
coils of his turban, Mughīth threw one end to the man, who used it as a
rope to assist his comrades in scaling the barrier.

The entrance into the city was achieved quietly and with little loss of
time. With scarcely any effort of resistance, the startled inhabitants
fled from their houses, and, headed by the Governor, rushed to a church
for safety. The edifice proved a veritable fastness for a large number
of the people. Mughīth Ar-rumi was baffled. His only course was to cut
off all approach to and egress from the church, trusting that starvation
would compel the imprisoned populace to yield. But he was unaware that a
conduit brought water underground to the building, and that the
defenders were probably able to hold out for some time, having provided
themselves with rations for a state of siege.

A negro, who managed to find a way into the church, was sent as a spy.
This man immediately fell into the hands of the besieged, who were at
first alarmed by his appearance. They had never seen a human creature
with a skin of ebony and hair of wool. Mistaking the hue of the black
man’s skin for uncleanliness, they washed and scrubbed him with great
pains. But, greatly to their wonder, the black covering refused to leave
the man’s skin, and they at length ended the prolonged ablutions. In
seven days the much-scrubbed negro made his escape. To Mughīth he
reported the conduit. Whereupon the general promptly cut off the supply
of water, and thought to bring the people to instant surrender. He was,
however, disappointed, for the band in the church still bravely held out
and defied him.

The extremest measure was at length employed by the impatient Moor. For
three months the refugees had resisted all endeavour to eject them or to
starve them into submission. The church was fired, and the luckless
defenders had no choice between instant death and yielding. They rushed
from the flames, and the Governor of the city was taken captive. The
church was afterwards known as ‘The Church of the Burning.’

So fell the Kordhobah of the Gothic kings. The palace became the
residence of Mughīth, who lived there until he had decided upon the
future government of the city. Before leaving Cordova, the Moorish
general appointed the Jewish residents the rulers of the city. Thus the
oppressed and plundered Hebrew came into possession, and rose to the
position of autocratic director of those who had bitterly persecuted
him. This affront to the dignity of the proud Goths was doubtless
grievous to them in the hour of their defeat. But it was a shrewd policy
of rulership on the part of Mughīth Ar-rumi.

Whether certain of the Moorish writers of this period are correct in
relating that Tarik was before the walls of Cordova, we are not able to
say. It is written that he came with an army, and after waiting nine
days in impatience, being unable to force an entry, he departed, and
left Mughīth to capture the city.

Cordova was now made subject to the Khalif of Damascus; but in 756 it
was independent, under the rule of Abd-er-Rahman I. According to
El-Makkari, Ayub was the first to establish the capital of the
territory of Andalus at Cordova.

Mughīth, the capturer of Cordova, was not only an intrepid soldier, he
was a scholar and poet, and a lover of the arts. After the taking of the
city he went to Damascus, but returned to Cordova and lived in the
palace.




III

THE OMEYYAD DYNASTY


Abd-er-Rahman, a brave prince of a family that had ruled Damascus, was
born in troubled times in the camp before that city. Es-Deffah had
seized upon the throne; the family of the Omeyyads was hurled from
power. While under sentence of death for his attempt to restore the
fortunes of his family, Abd-er-Rahman passed a period of wandering among
Arab herdsmen. His dream was of Andalusia, where the supporters of the
Omeyyads were still numerous and powerful; and by dint of energy and
enthusiasm the young prince contrived to form a corps of one thousand
Arabs.

Abdulmalek Ibn Kattan, who had usurped rulership in Cordova, had been
defeated by the adventurous Balj at the head of a troop of Syrians. The
luckless Abdulmalek, after falling into the hands of Balj, was crucified
in a field outside Cordova, with a hog on one side and a dog on the
other. Until recovered by friends and removed for burial, the body of
the conquered sultan was left upon the cross as a menace to his
followers.

But Balj enjoyed only a short spell of power, for at the end of eleven
months he was forced to encounter the redoubtable prince of the
Omeyyads, whose army of Arabs was largely augmented by fierce partisans
in Spain.

Marching upon Cordova, Abd-er-Rahman besieged the city. Balj was
wounded, and his injuries caused his death. From this time, for about
three centuries, the capital of Andalusia was held by the Omeyyad line,
and during this rule the city reached the highest stage of its might and
magnificence. The Arab writers state that the independent khalifate of
Cordova was founded by Abd-er-Rahman I., after conquering Yusuf, who
reigned in the city. Yusuf resisted the Omeyyad troops outside the walls
of Cordova, and, being worsted, he retired. Abd-er-Rahman then entered
the city, and appointing the command to Abu Othman, went in pursuit of
the remnant of Yusuf’s army. Meanwhile Yusuf counter-marched, returned
to Cordova, and assailed Abu Othman, promising him future security for
himself and his relatives if he would surrender.

It is said that Othman refused to accept the terms of surrender. But
eventually Yusuf and Abd-er-Rahman came to an agreement, and both
monarchs lived in the city (A.D. 757) in amity. The treaty was, however,
afterwards broken by Yusuf, who left his palace, collected a force, and
made war in Andalusia. He was frustrated by the Governor of Seville, but
after the conflict Yusuf escaped to Toledo. Here he was recognised in
the street, and murdered, by spies who hoped to receive reward for their
fealty to Abd-er-Rahman. Yusuf’s head was sent to Cordova, and nailed to
an arch of the bridge, together with the head of his son.

Upon attaining the throne, Abd-er-Rahman began to turn his energies to
the development of Cordova. He had a passion for building. A new palace
arose, mosques and baths were erected, and an aqueduct was constructed
to bring pure water from the mountains. In 786 Abd-er-Rahman supervised
the building of the huge and splendid Mezquita.

In character the first Omeyyad ruler was humane, eloquent, and brave. He
had red hair, a fresh skin, and high cheek-bones. His form was tall and
supple, and he was fond of exercise, especially the sport of falconry.
His dress was always of white linen, and he lived simply.

There are, however, blots upon the reputation of Abd-er-Rahman I. He was
of violent temper, and subject to strong prejudices. His treatment of
Abu Othman, Temain, and other allies, who had assisted him in gaining
power, was not generous. He reigned for over thirty-three years, and was
buried in Cordova.

Hisham, son of Abd-er-Rahman, succeeded in the government of Cordova. He
was esteemed as a wise king, and under his direction the work of
building and adorning the Mezquita was continued. Hisham founded schools
for teaching the Arabic language, and he restored the long bridge over
the Guadalquivir.

The next ruler was Hakem, who continued the work of enlarging and
improving the mosque. This sovereign was soon confronted with the trials
of a rebellion in the city, and a very grievous period of famine. A poet
of Cordova wrote:

    ‘Time has brought on sterility and famine, but the calamity itself
         has proved a benefit to Al-Hakem.
     It has insured his rule, and delivered him of many a rebellious
         subject.’

Hakem was the first king to give regular pay to the army. He left a
family of twenty boys and twenty girls, and the throne descended to one
of his sons, Abd-er-Rahman II.

The fourth Omeyyad sultan was an encourager of poets, painters, and
philosophers. Abu Meruan, the illustrious historian, lived in this
reign, and Ziryāb, the distinguished musician, was a court favourite.
When Ziryāb was on his way to the city of culture and the arts, his
royal patron went out to receive him with honour and pomp. Being himself
a poet and a passionate worshipper of music, Abd-er-Rahman II. was a
true friend of all artists.

Ziryāb, the composer, was singularly versatile. We read that he invented
a new process for making linen white, that he introduced asparagus into
Andalusia, invented a crystal ware, and taught the use of leather beds.

It is interesting to learn that the harem of the second Abd-er-Rahman
contained several cultured women. One of these was Tarūb, a favourite
concubine, to whom the monarch addressed these lines:

    ‘When the sun rises every day to give us light, it reminds
        me of Tarūb.
     I am the happiest of mortals, since I am successful in love
        and prosperous in war.’

Another beauty of the court was Kalam, a woman of learning. She recited
poetry and was gifted in music.

We may pass over the somewhat uneventful period of rule under Mohammed
and Abdullah, and enter upon the reign of the illustrious Abd-er-Rahman
III. (912-961), the greatest of the Omeyyads, and the most enlightened
of the trio of monarchs bearing his name. This was the crowning, the
most glorious, hour of Cordova’s splendour. The Moors were in possession
of almost the whole of Spain. Draw a line on the map of the country from
the north-eastern limit of the Pyrenees to Coimbra, north of Lisbon, and
you will divide the region of the conquered Iberians of the Biscayan
mountains from the kingdom of the Mohammedans. All the districts below
the line were governed by the Moors. In 1360 only Granada remained as
the remnant of Moorish might in Spain.

Abd-er-Rahman III. lived in a gorgeous palace in the northern quarter of
Cordova. This was but one of the sumptuous houses of the city in the
height of its grandeur, for, on the authority of several chroniclers,
there were fifty thousand palaces in Cordova, besides three hundred
mosques. One of these palaces was known as Damascus; others were called
the Palace of the Garden, the Palace of Contentment, and the Palace of
Flowers. The glitter of Cordova shone afar throughout the Moslem world.
Ibn Said, the historian, wrote a full description of ‘the beauties of
the kingdom of Cordova,’ containing information concerning the
population, industries, and buildings of the fair and opulent city. The
water from the aqueduct was collected in a large reservoir, in which
stood the image of a lion, covered with gold, and having jewels for the
eyes. The stream poured in at the hind part of the lion, and gushed from
the mouth, and the overflow ran to the Guadalquivir.

A palace upon arches was built over the river. Dimascus, the chief
palace, had roofs supported by marble columns, and dazzling floors of
mosaics. Walls surrounded the city, which was approached by beautiful
gates, bearing such names as Bab Koriah (the Gate of Coria),
Bábu-el-Tamen (the Gate of the Gardens), and Bábu-el-Jemi (the Gate of
the Great Mosque).

The wise, the studious, and those skilled in the arts and the crafts
flocked to Cordova during the reign of Abd-er-Rahman III. Surrounded by
the learned in his splendid palace, the great Khalif lived in an
atmosphere of thought and beauty. Literary men came nightly to recite
their stories to the sultan and his nobles, musicians played their
compositions, and masters of science expounded their theories and
discoveries.

Amid the counsels of the intellectual and the prudent Abd-er-Rahman
ruled with discretion, justice, and tolerance; Spain had reached the
height of its civilisation. The land was made to yield of its richest;
fruits and flowers of the tropics flourished; the steeds of Arabia were
bred in the vales around the city; workers in clay, wood, and metals
plied their crafts with loving industry; and the world wondered at this
spectacle of might, culture, and peace.

It was Abd-er-Rahman III. who caused the building of Medinat-Ez-Zahra, a
city situated at a distance of four miles and a third from Cordova. This
marvellous suburb contained markets, taverns, baths, and institutions of
learning. A stupendous mosque was erected. El-Makkari speaks of the
magnificent palace, wherein the Khalif was served by an army of
servants; the gardens, and the fishponds teeming with well-fed fish, who
were regaled with a daily allowance of twelve thousand loaves of bread.

Forty years were spent in the making of Ez-Zahra. Ten thousand workmen
and three thousand horses and mules were employed in the labour. The
columns came from Carthage, Rome, and Constantinople; the walls and
roof of the palace were of marble adorned with gold.

Upon viewing the majestic city, a Moorish writer cried: ‘Praise be to
God Most High for allowing His humble creatures to design and build such
enchanting palaces as this, and who permitted them to inhabit them as a
sort of recompence in this world, and in order that the faithful might
be encouraged to follow the path of virtue, by the reflection that,
delightful as were these pleasures, they were still far below those
reserved for the true believer in the Celestial Paradise.’

When the messengers of Constantine came to Ez-Zahra, they were awed and
made speechless by the majestic grandeur of the palace. Alas! to-day not
a vestige of Medinat-Ez-Zahra survives. The ruthless Berbers razed the
fair city to the ground in 1010, leaving not a stone to remind the
beholder of its past glory.

The last Abd-er-Rahman possessed a love of ceremony and splendour. He
built palaces, mosques, and halls to appease this passion of
ostentation; and we read that when potentates journeyed to seek his
presence, he caused elaborate buildings to be erected for their nightly
reception along the route. In reading of the Mezquita, we shall see how
much of his time and wealth were devoted to improving and embellishing
the great structure.

Upon the city of Ez-Zahra Abd-er-Rahman spent huge sums from the
treasury. It was built to please one of his concubines, after whom it
was named, and a statue of the fair favourite was carved in relief over
the chief gateway. The palaces were of massive plan and beautiful
design. Dark hills formed the background to the city, and referring to
the situation Ez-Zahra said: ‘See, O master, how beautiful this girl
looks in the arms of yonder Ethiopian.’ The sombre hills were, however,
an eyesore to Abd-er-Rahman, and he proposed to remove them; but this
feat of engineering was not carried out, and to relieve the blackness of
the slopes the Sultan caused them to be planted with fig and almond
trees.

Hakem II., who succeeded Abd-er-Rahman, was a just ruler, distinguished
for his humility. He was a zealous ascetic, and he passed laws
condemning the use of wine. To enforce abstinence from the juice of the
grape, he rooted up the vineyards. We shall see later how this Khalif
devoted himself to enriching the Mezquita.

We have now reached the reign of the powerful Almanzor, or Almansur, a
romantic and ambitious personage, who came to Cordova as a poor student.
During the days of his poverty he made a scanty livelihood by writing
letters, and became the protégé of Aurora, mother of Hisham II. After
attaining this post, he appears to have made quick advance towards
preferment, for he was soon appointed kadi of a town, and obtained a
position as a civil servant in the city of Seville. Returning to
Cordova, he paid homage to his patroness Aurora, and gave her costly
gifts. His next appointment was as master of the mint, and we learn that
he built himself a mansion of silver.

Almanzor’s career was a fight for power. He won general esteem by his
prowess as a soldier, and in the wars with the Christians he triumphed
in fifty-six battles. Even when stricken by illness, Almanzor went to
the field in a litter, and directed the movements of his force in their
attacks on the infidels. Always scheming for authority, he contrived to
usurp rule in Andalusia. The attainment of his desire did not yield him
complete felicity, for he once wept at the thought that war would one
day destroy his sway and level his magnificent palace.

Under Almanzor Cordova grew in might and was still regarded as the
wonder of the Moslem world. The Vizier was a man of culture, a clever
diplomatist, and a valorous soldier. Conde says that in battle ‘he
resembled a raging panther, leaping on the prey and thirsting for
blood.’ In times of peace he held poetical tournaments, rewarding the
victorious poets with heavy prizes of money for their verses. Almanzor
was the founder of Ez-Zahirah, a town which grew up in the vicinity of
Ez-Zahra. It contained a resplendent palace, which was two years in the
building. Here the monarch maintained a court, and received foreign
potentates, with much ceremony and parade of wealth.

Cordova saw the first signs of impending decadence when Almanzor died,
and his son Muzaffar came in to rule. Under Almanzor the glory of the
city reached its culmination. ‘Do not make war on these people, for by
the Lord we have seen the earth yielding them its hidden treasures,’ was
the counsel of the Sclavonian ambassadors, after they had sojourned in
Cordova, and seen the wonders and riches of Ez-Zahra and Ez-Zahirah
displayed before their dazzled eyes. Vast were the resources and the
armaments of these three marvellous cities, and famous for valour were
their sons. Almanzor forged thousands of blades and spears, and the
yield of his shield manufactory was twelve thousand in one year.

And yet power, pomp, learning and the arts--all decayed with the waning
of the great Omeyyad dynasty. The ripe fruit of this fine civilisation
seems to have rotted rapidly. Such social science as the Moors possessed
could not save it from destruction; the arts of war, in which the makers
of Kordhobah were so excellent, failed against the inexorable march of
decadence. Boastful imperialism and luxury ate out the heart of the
city, till it could not withstand the savage Berber mob. Complete
disorder prevailed, palaces were wrecked, mosques were pillaged,
treasure looted, gardens laid waste, and the largest library in the
world was ransacked and plundered.

We can scarcely form a conception of all the beauteous edifices, the
noble works of artist and craftsman, that perished in this last
upheaval. Almanzor’s palace was ruthlessly burned to the ground. The
city claimed to be an independent republic. Robbers swarmed in the holy
fanes, and murderers rushed red-handed through the streets.

In A.D. 1010 the Berbers attacked Ez-Zahra, and killed its defenders
with savage ferocity. Even within the mosque the fugitive citizens were
not safe from the swords of the invading barbarians. Led by Ibn Hishaim
Ibn Abd-l-Jabbar, the rebels swooped upon Cordova. The glorious art
treasures of Ez-Zahirah were seized by the troops, and the mansions were
destroyed by fire. Baghdad and other towns of the east became the
storehouses of the jewels, plate, books, and pictures which were stolen
from Cordova; and the uncultured horde came into possession under the
leadership of Suleyman. Only vestiges of Cordova’s pristine grandeur
survived this period of frenzied rapine.

Lamentable was the fall of this centre of wisdom, virtue, refinement,
and the arts. Nothing could restore its majesty and pre-eminence.
Misruled by discordant factions, Cordova lingered moribund, a sad
spectacle of shattered might. It has never regained a tithe of its
former supremacy. The drowsy city lives on its memories of greatness.

In 1235 Ferdinand III.--the doughty Christian warrior San Fernando--took
the city at the point of the sword, and reclaimed it from the alien
heretic.

Spain rejoiced at this capture of the capital of Moorish power. It was
a triumph for the soldiers of the Cross. Most of the vanquished
Cordovans took refuge in Granada; the ‘reconciled’ sullenly accepted the
conditions imposed upon them, and remained in the city. Such was the
downfall of the Khalifs. The Christians established rule in the
despoiled capital; the mosque was purified from its taint of the Moslem,
and dedicated to the worship of God and the Virgin, and one by one the
hundreds of baths fell into disuse, for cleanliness was not a canon of
the victorious faith.

The coming of San Fernando only hastened the process of disruption in
Cordova. War was the chief business of the Spaniard at this age, and
handicraft was despised as something unworthy of a true Castilian
_caballero_. All the possibilities of reconstruction and restoration
were neglected by the Christians, who were more concerned with expelling
the Moors and shattering every relic of their rule, than in making
reasonable use of the resources and the crafts which they had developed
and brought to perfection. The remnant of the Moors still remained the
designers, craft-workers, and agriculturists, but their arts and their
husbandry steadily declined. No great and beautiful buildings were
reared on the ashes of Cordova, excepting the Christian additions to
the Mezquita, which was consecrated in the name of the Vírgen de la
Asuncíon.

The militarist Spaniards had no time to devote to trade, the cultivation
of the vegas, and the extension of learning. Buildings which had been
the joy of the Moors were permitted to crumble, or were pulled down to
supply material for the erection of squalid dwellings. Grim ruin
descended upon fair Cordova; melancholy decay succeeded its long era of
growth and prosperity. The admirable irrigation system, which had made
the meadows lush and the land fecund, was left unused, and the vineyards
and plots were neglected. Briars and weeds gained supremacy in the
fertile valley; the earth became impoverished and barren. The beautiful
horses of Arab breed, which were reared by the Moors, deteriorated in
stamina and grace, and degenerate cattle roamed the plains by the
Guadalquivir. Forests planted by the makers of Cordova were felled; the
country was rendered bare of foliage and shade.

In the seventeenth century the population of the city had been reduced
to about seventy thousand inhabitants, and the number of its residents
steadily dwindled after the expulsion of the Moors. There are now about
fifty thousand people in Cordova. In the tenth century three hundred
thousand persons dwelt in the city and its surroundings.

The Mezquita, the bridge, the mosque of Almanzor and the ruins of the
Alcazar stand as eloquent examples of the Cordova of Almanzor: not a
stone survives of the luxurious palaces, whose names suggest Oriental
splendour and the joy of life. We can but imagine the charm of the
Palace of Contentment and the Palace of the Diadem, and the loveliness
of the scented gardens that delighted sultans and sultanas, and the
sages and the poets of the far-famed ‘Bride of Andalusia.’

Hushed is the voice of the muezzin: no longer can men sit entranced at
the strains of the musicians, or listen to the recitals of the doctors
and the poets. But the same notes of the nightingale drift on the
perfumed breeze of evening, and the hawks still sail and soar above the
minaret. And in the Court of Oranges, girls of erect and Moorish mien
bear Oriental pitchers on their heads, as they resort to the fountain
for water; while through the open door of the Mezquita one may scent the
incense, and see the tangled vista of Arabic arches; or, standing upon
the many-arched bridge, watch the selfsame umber river which legions
upon legions of dusky warriors crossed to victory.

Thus Cordova, though in a sense dead, still lives and speaks. Its stones
are vividly reminiscent of the days of the Moors; the atmosphere is
mysteriously impressive, and the features of its natives have still the
Arab cast, while in their customs and their speech traces of the Moor
survive.

With the triumph of San Fernando came the steady disintegration of the
high civilisation of Cordova, and its history from the day of victory
onwards is one both mournful and instructive. The expulsion of the Arab
artisans was an error of policy which the more intelligent Cordovese
quickly recognised, for soon after the restoration of the city into the
hands of the Spanish sovereigns, many of the inhabitants proposed to
request the king to permit six per cent. of the Moors to remain in
Cordova. This petition was, however, lightly regarded by the Governor,
and it does not appear to have come under the attention of Ferdinand.
Later on, the citizens, finding that trade was rapidly declining, begged
that a few aged Moors might be allowed to stay in the city, and to ply
their trade of harness-makers.

The neglect of the staple industries of Cordova after the Christian
reconstruction is an object-lesson upon the paralysis of the arts and
crafts which characterises the Castilian influence during this period.
It seems almost incredible that the Spaniards had forgotten the art of
harness-making, or that the natives of Cordova refused to soil their
fingers in any sort of labour. But what other inferences can be drawn
from the proposed petitions that a small number of the Moriscos might be
retained as mechanics? It appears evident that the only occupations
deemed fitting for an Andalusian of that day were ecclesiastic or
military. There was only the choice between the church and the army.

An observant traveller, the Chevalier de Bourgoanne, who made a tour of
Spain in 1797, writes of the melancholy decay of Cordova. ‘In so fine a
climate,’ says the Chevalier, ‘in midst of so many sources of
prosperity, it (Cordova) contains no more than 35,000 inhabitants.
Formerly celebrated for its manufactories of silks, fine cloths, etc.,
it has now no other industrious occupations but a few manufactories of
ribbons, galoons, hats and baize.’




IV

THE BUILDING OF THE MOSQUE


When Abd-er-Rahman I. seized upon the citadel of the Gothic Christian
kings, he found the Cordovese split up into various sects, such as the
Gnostics, Priscillianists, Donatists, and Luciferians. These cults were,
however, united in their detestation of the new creed of the East, which
the victors sought to impose upon them. It is quite clear from the
records of the more impartial Spanish historians, that the Sultan was a
man of tolerant mould and a respecter of justice. His ambition was to
erect a temple, which would rival in magnificence those of Baghdad,
Jerusalem, and Damascus, and approach in sanctity to the fane of Mecca
itself.

The Christian church in Cordova stood upon the site of the former Roman
religious edifice dedicated to Janus, and upon this situation
Abd-er-Rahman desired to rear his great mosque. Autocrat though he was,
the monarch strove to maintain the conditions upon which the
inhabitants had surrendered. He might have broken faith, and annexed
the Christian building and the ground upon which it stood. But he
honourably offered to buy the church and the plot from the conquered
people. The negotiations of purchase were placed in the hands of the
Sultan’s favourite secretary, Umeya Ibn Yezid.

At first the Christians refused to sell their cherished basilica, which
had been divided into a temple of the faith of Christ and a fane for the
worship of Allah. Here, in separate portions of the building, the
conquerors and the conquered murmured their prayers and repeated their
praises to their deities. How the Cordovese were induced to relinquish
the church cannot be explained by any historical evidence that we are
able to obtain from the writings of Arabians and Spaniards. Some authors
have suggested that the Christians of Cordova were disheartened by
adversity and the assaults of Islam upon their creed, and that they
yielded to the suasion and counsels of Umeya Ibn Yezid, and sold their
tabernacle to the invaders. At any rate it is manifest that
Abd-er-Rahman won in the end, and that he was able to forward his
project without showing violence to the natives of Cordova.

No doubt the Christians preferred to worship in their own buildings
rather than to share the basilica with the infidels, and this preference
may have influenced their spiritual leaders in meeting the request of
the sultan and his agent. Under the terms of transference, the Cordovese
were permitted to reconstruct the edifice formerly dedicated to St.
Faustus, St. Januarius, and St. Marcellus, three martyrs whom they
deeply revered. Immediately upon the conveyance of the church and its
site to Abd-er-Rahman, the work of erecting the gorgeous mosque was
begun with much enthusiasm and at the expenditure of huge sums of money.
The Khalif was rich. Besides the treasure wrested from the Goths during
the wars, he extracted a tithe upon the produce of the land and on
manufactures. A tax was also laid upon every Christian and Jew in
Andalusia. Beyond this, the Moorish kings were greatly enriched by the
acquisition of the valuable mines of Spain, the quarries of marble, and
other sources of wealth. From these revenues Abd-er-Rahman and his
successors, Hisham, Abd-er-Rahman II., the greatest of the dynasty and
the third of the line--and lastly, the extravagant Al-manzor--lavished
heavy sums upon the designing, construction, and costly adornment of the
Mosque.

The power of the first Khalif of Cordova was supreme and undisputed. He
was the sole spiritual and temporal head of the people, ‘the Commander
of the Faithful.’ Subservient to him were the _walis_ who ruled in the
provinces. Abd-er-Rahman’s despotism made upon the whole for charity,
tolerance, and justice. The accounts of his persecutions have been
coloured by pious historians, and bear the stamp of a natural hostility
to the conqueror and his religion. One or two of the more accurate
Spanish writers assert that, at the most, only forty persons were
martyred in Cordova under the Omeyyad sway; and, according to Morales,
these victims sought persecution.

To court sufferings at the hands of the Moors was deemed a noble virtue
in the breast of the devout Christians. We may recall the story of Santa
Teresa of Avila, who, as a child, wandered from the city with her little
brother to seek persecution in the country of the infidels. Whatever may
be charged against the Khalifs of the family of Omeyya, it cannot be
asserted that their policy after the conquest was one of tyrannous
subjugation. They undoubtedly levied taxes and imposts upon the Goths,
and confiscated their lands, after a campaign of destruction and
aggression; but as victors they displayed magnanimity, and sought to
heal the wounded spirit of the vanquished.

The attitude of Abd-er-Rahman I. towards the Christian population of
Cordova was, therefore, clement and conciliatory. Under his sovereignty
there dawned an age of prosperity and advancement. The work of building
the resplendent Mezquita employed thousands of artisans and labourers.
This vast undertaking led to the development of all the resources of the
district. Durable stone and beautifully veined marbles were quarried
from the Sierra Morena and the surrounding regions of the city. Metals
of various kinds were dug from the soil, and factories sprang up in
Cordova amid the stir and bustle of an awakened industrial energy. A
famous Syrian architect made the plans for the Mosque. Leaving his
suburban dwelling, the Khalif came to reside in the city, so that he
might personally superintend the operations, and offer proposals for the
improvement of the designs. We are told that Abd-er-Rahman moved about
among the workers, directing them during several hours of every day. The
monarch was growing old. It was the longing of his heart to witness the
final achievement of his great scheme before death overtook him.

In planning the Mosque the architects incorporated a number of Roman
columns with choice capitals. Some of the columns were already in the
Gothic structure; others were sent from various quarters of Spain as
presents from the governors of provinces. Ivory, jasper, porphyry, gold,
silver, copper, and brass were used in the decorations. Marvellous
mosaics and azulejos were designed. Panels of scented woods were
fastened with nails of pure gold, and the red marble columns were said
to be the work of God. The primitive part of the building, reared under
the direction of Abd-er-Rahman I., was that bordering the Court of
Oranges. Later, the immense temple embodied all the styles of Morisco
architecture in one noble composition.

The first Khalif of Cordova did not survive to witness the completion of
the Mosque. He died in the Alcazar long before the work was finished,
and committed the task to his son Hisham. The prince carried on the work
with zealous devotion. Upon his father’s death in 788, the building
covered only a small part of the ground now occupied by the Mosque and
its later additions. Hisham I. built the tower for the muezzin, and the
fretted gallery for the women worshippers, and added much to the Zeca,
or House of Purification, erected by Abd-er-Rahman.

The Court of Ablutions was laid out by the first Khalif, and occupied
the ground of the present Court of Oranges. In constructing the Mosque,
the founders adapted the basilica form of building to the new worship.
During the Omeyyad dynasty the original building was constantly enlarged
and improved, and fresh decorations were added up to the time of
Almanzor. Each Khalif vied with his predecessor in beautifying the
temple. The pristine building was finished ten years after the planning
under Abd-er-Rahman I., that is, during the reign of Hisham I., who
conducted the labour with the utmost expedition. Marbles of spotless
white were chosen for the innumerable columns. Arrazi, an Arab writer,
speaks of the valuable wine-coloured marble, obtained from the mountains
of the district, which was much used in embellishing the naves of the
Mosques of Cordova and Ez-Zahra.

The solemnity and beauty of the ceremonies in the House of Purification
can only be imagined. Every day saw the celebration of the _tazamein_,
or purification of the devout, before entering the holy structure, and
six times daily the _alicama_, or call to prayer, was shouted by the
muezzin from the summit of the minaret. No shoes were permitted to
defile the sanctuary; the worshippers entered barefooted. From its
sacred shadow all Jews were excluded, and restrictions guarded the
approach of women, except the privileged royal brides.

The interior glittered with gold, silver, precious stones, mosaics, and
hundreds of lamps of brass. By the side of the priest stood a mighty wax
candle, and the scent of the burning aloes, ambergris, and perfumed oils
in the lanterns drifted through the tangled arches of the long naves.
Some of the brass lamps were made out of bells taken from Christian
churches. The pulpit was seven years in the making. It was of ivory,
ebony, sandal, aloe, and citron wood, with nails of gold and silver.
Eight artists lavished their skill upon the designing and adorning of
this pulpit. In the wondrous mih-rab the walls were of pure gold. A copy
of the Koran in a gold case, set with pearls and rubies, was kept in the
pulpit. It was taken away by Abu-Mohammed on one of his campaigns, and
was finally lost to the faithful.

The building of the Mosque began in 785 or 786, and throughout the rule
of the Omeyyad monarchs there were constant additions to the Zeca of
Abd-er-Rahman I. As Cordova grew, and strangers flocked to the city from
North Africa and Arabia, it was found necessary to provide a larger
edifice for the worshippers. In the time of Abd-er-Rahman II., the House
of Purification was enlarged by the addition of several aisles, two
porches were added, and a new mih-rab was constructed. The columns were
gilded at this period at the direction of the Sultan. During the reign
of Mohammed I. the work was continued; the walls and portals were
improved, and the maksurrah, or railed sanctum for the Khalif, was also
built. The ruler attended the services in great pomp on Fridays,
approaching the Mosque by an underground passage from his palace.

Hisham’s temple covered an area of 460 feet from north to south, and 280
feet from east to west. It was flanked by stout, fortified walls, with
watch-towers and a tall minaret. The number of the outer gates was nine,
and of the inner doors eleven. These doors led to the same number of
naves within the Mosque. The court had spacious gates on the north,
west, and east sides, and fountains for the purification of the pious.
The naves were eleven in number, stretching from north to south, and
these were crossed by twenty-one smaller naves running from east to
west.

In the Mezquita of Cordova we see the first examples of the true Arabian
architecture, whose purity was lost at a later date in the style of the
Almohades. The Estilo Sarraceno, or earlier style of design and
decoration, has an example in the beautiful Puerta del Perdon of the
Mosque of Cordova. We learn that by the year 1282 the fashion in form
and adornment had so greatly changed, that the Moors who then remained
in the city appeared unable to follow the tradition of their craft in
decorating the interior of the cathedral. Even in the reign of Almanzor,
the specific style of the Arabs was giving place to less beautiful
conceptions of line and decoration. Nevertheless, it is generally
admitted that the Mosque is the finest example in Europe of the Moorish
religious edifice. It maintains uniformity in the plan of its
construction, while the dimensions are enormous, and the adornment
elegant and characteristic of the art of Islam in the flower of its
might and magnificence.

Abd-er-Rahman III. assumed his title of Khalif with the style of
_En-Nāsir li-dīni-llāh_, ‘the Defender of the Faith of God,’ added to
the Mosque a new tower, and renovated the ancient façade. The minaret
contained two staircases, which were built for the separate ascent and
descent of the tower. On the summit there were three apples, two of gold
and one of silver, with lilies of six petals. The minaret is four-faced,
with fourteen windows, having arches upon jasper columns, and the
structure is adorned with splendid tracery.

Long before the final stages in the history of the Omeyyad builders, the
Moslem temple of Cordova was deemed one of the greatest marvels of
architecture in the world. The chroniclers and poets of the period unite
in applauding the zeal of the sovereigns who expended such vast treasure
in furthering the glory of Allah by the erection of this sumptuous and
dazzling tabernacle. Abúlmothanne, the poet, wrote of the Mosque: ‘To it
the pilgrims resort from all parts of the world, as if it were the
sacred temple of Mekka. Indeed, its mih-rab, when examined, will be
found to contain _rokn_ (angles) as well as _makárn_ (standing-place).’
And another singer proclaimed that the Mosque, which was consecrated to
God, was ‘without equal in the world.’

Hakem II., Al-Mostansir-billáh, greatly increased the size of the
building. This just and cultured ruler caused the construction of the
third mih-rab, which was over four years in the making and rivalled all
the previous work in this gorgeous part of the Mosque. The new sanctuary
was crowned with a splendid cupola, and the marvellous mosaics of
foseyfasa were introduced. Hakem also designed a fresh maksurrah for the
Sultan, a space enclosed by an ornate wooden fence or screen, which was
beautifully domed in the Byzantine style.

Hakem II. was not only occupied in extending and adorning the interior
of the Mezquita. During his busy reign in Cordova, the immense library
was enlarged by contributions of manuscripts upon all subjects, gathered
from every part of the civilised nations. But the library, with its
unique treasures of Oriental lore, and its works of science in many
languages, was lost to the world upon the wrecking and downfall of the
city. The fruit of Hakem’s devotion remains, however, in the most
gorgeous and lovely embellishments of the Mosque. This Khalif also built
an alms-house adjoining the temple, and quarters for the residence of
the preachers and officials of the house of worship.

The style introduced by Hakem II. is seen in the Puerta Murada, in the
holy mih-rab, and the part once occupied by the maksurrah. This
sovereign delighted in rich colouring, in splendour and daring in the
construction of delicate columns to heavy arches, and in the extension
of the fantastic arched naves. He almost doubled the size of the
Mezquita by the extensions on the south side.

Under Almanzor there was no slackening in the enthusiasm which the
Omeyyad family exhibited in improving Cordova and extending and
beautifying its famous House of Purification. The part added to the
Mosque by Almanzor is that behind the altar, to the left, when entering
by the Door of Pardon. The enlargement during this Khalif’s rule was
towards the east. New rows of columns, numbering eight, were added,
giving a fresh sense of vastness to the aisles and vistas of interlaced
arches.

The great Mosque was completed in the time of Almanzor, and its
completion was the presage of the decline of Arab power in Spain. In
extent the building now measures 394 feet by 360 feet. Almanzor put the
finishing touches to the work which Abd-er-Rahman I. began. For
generations architects, designers, artists, masons, and metal-workers
had lovingly toiled to produce a triumph of art.

The Mosque was finished. Almanzor sought to improve upon the designs
and bewildering brilliance displayed in the labour of preceding reigns;
but it is doubtful whether his endeavours heightened the splendour of
the structure, or gave fresh lustre to the building that stood in the
days of Hakem II. It is agreed among the authorities upon Moorish art
that Almanzor’s contributions to the edifice show evidence of a decline
in taste, and a waning of the æsthetic sense of the Arab-Byzantine
schools of designers and craftsmen.

When Almanzor died, the Mosque was 742 feet in length from north to
south, and 472 feet in width from east to west. It was encompassed by
battlemented walls, with towers of irregular height. The south wall was
the highest, and it had nineteen towers. The total number of the
watch-towers was forty-eight, and the majority of these have survived.

In the stressful days when the Moorish colonisers sought to possess the
whole of the Iberian Peninsula, Cordova was stoutly fortified, and the
Mosque was protected by this unscalable wall. This barrier of stone is
over six feet thick, and designed to withstand the most violent
battering. The defences of the sanctuary are very picturesque; there is
a subject for the painter at every tower and corner; but they are
perhaps a little less wonderful than the grim walls of Avila, or the
sombre parapets of brown Toledo. They are made of durable stone, which
is marvellously preserved. Many times have these battlements shuddered
at the shouts of the fierce besiegers and the determined defenders;
often have their stones been stained with the blood of Goth and Moor.

To-day, in the shadow of the walls, we stroll and look upon the calm
vistas, the plain, and the cold grey slopes of the sierras, and see the
beggars shrinking from the blinding glare of the sun, prone upon the
ground in their tatters, in the cool shelter which the tall towers
yield. The Mosque dreams, as all things dream in ancient Spain. Its
solid outer walls have defied the ravage of storms and wars. They remain
weird monuments of Oriental strength, placid and somewhat mournful in
their magnificent sufficiency.




V

IN THE COURT OF ORANGES


The Court of Oranges is shaded on one side by the oldest parts of the
Mosque. It is much larger than the Orange Court, or Patio de los
Naranjos, of the cathedral of Seville. Here was once the Court of
Ablutions, the place where the faithful purified themselves before
venturing within the Mezquita. The fountains, five in number, remain to
remind us of the original character of the courtyard. Women come here to
fetch water from the clear springs. They carry tall jars upon their
hips, or upon their heads, and loiter by the fountain to gossip.

This quiet court invites the aged and the idler. It is cool and
gratefully shaded, and when the orange-trees are in bloom a fragrance
pervades the place. The priests who officiate in the cathedral spend the
hours of leisure here, pacing in pairs up and down, as they smoke their
cigarettes. Now and again, one notes the lover waiting for his fair one
amid the fountains and the palms.

Once there were nineteen beautiful gateways leading into the Court of
the Oranges, and these were uniform with the nineteen aisles. We enter
by the Puerta de los Palmas, facing the Puerta del Perdon. The sumptuous
Gate of Pardon at once attracts us. It is over twenty feet high, with
the characteristic horseshoe arches and the elaborate Oriental
ornamentation. But this is not the ancient gate; it dates from the
Christian recapture of Cordova, and is constructed in imitation of the
Arabian work. It is surmounted by a belfry. The upper part of the
horseshoe arches is exceedingly ornate, and on either side are coats of
arms. The structure is in the Estilo Sarraceno. There are massive doors,
coated with copper, upon which are inscriptions. Above the door are
poorly painted frescoes.

The Bell Tower erected in place of the old minaret of Abd-er-Rahman III.
is not Moorish. It was designed by Hernan Ruiz, one of the Christian
architects who planned the cathedral. This tower is interesting as a
later monument, but it is not in harmony with the Mosque. It rises
higher than the former minaret, is more pretentious, and is out of
character with the surroundings. On the top is a figure of San Rafael.

The Court of Oranges is over four hundred feet long and more than two
hundred feet in breadth. There was a destruction of many of the trees
during a violent storm about seventy years ago, and some of the
orange-trees were not replaced. The courtyard has quiet cloisters on
three sides, with pillars and arches in the Gothic style.

One side of the Patio de los Naranjos is occupied by the Mosque, and it
is here we see the finest exterior work of the time of Abd-er-Rahman I.
and Hisham. The portions added by Almanzor are behind the altar to the
left, when entering by the Gate of Pardon. In the main the impression
that one gains in the Court of Oranges is distinctly Moorish. The
fountains, the trees, the fine doors of the Mosque, the walls, the gate
on the eastern side, and the inscriptions are purely Oriental. For the
rest there has been tampering. The hand of the ‘restorer’ can be traced,
and the Bell Tower is an affront upon the old edifice.

Four of the fountains were originally constructed by Hakem II., when he
had spent his energy upon improving the interior of the Mezquita. The
two founts in the east were for the ablution of the women; the two in
the west for the purification of the men. The fountains were scooped out
of single blocks of marble, brought from one quarry. To bring these huge
masses of marble to their positions in the Court of Oranges, it was
necessary to make a sloping road. The fountains were drawn by oxen, and
borne upon heavy carts, and seventy beasts were required for each team.
When the tanks were set in their places, the water streamed in through
the great aqueduct of Abd-er-Rahman I., and the surplus went to fill
other fountains in the city.

There was no sparing of the toil of man or beast in the days when the
Omeyyads reigned in Cordova, for each Khalif seemed eager for the
completion of his share of work upon the Mezquita. The army of Morisco
labourers was augmented by a host of Christian captives, and we read
that these unfortunates were employed to carry stone upon their heads.
We can imagine the files of Christians, each man bending under his
burden, compelled to toil in the upraising of a mighty temple to the
glory of Islam. But the pendulum swings, and time brings its changes in
the fortunes of Moor and Christian. At a later period it is the
Mudejar, the ‘reconciled’ Moor, who supports the cumbrous loads upon
his head, and does the bidding of the Catholic in the construction of
the cathedral. And out of all this labour and sweat, hewing of stone,
forging of metal, carving of wood and ivory, beating of gold and silver,
and laying on of choice, imperishable colours, we have the composite
fane of to-day--the Christian cathedral enfolded in the more wondrous
structure of the Mohammedan Mosque. Surely there are questions that
flash upon the mind as we sit in the Orange Court, and listen to the
throb of the bell calling the Christians to prayer within the ancient
Mezquita of the Omeyyads!

But the Cordovese do not appear to ponder upon Time’s fantastic
transformations. They muse of other things--the affairs of the hour--and
regard the Mezquita as an excellent asset to their slumbrous and
impoverished city. Every stranger within their walls is looked upon as a
sightseer; and what should he come to see but the famous Mosque? And so
the boys in the street, offering their services as guides through the
labyrinthine white alleys, point ahead and cry: ‘Mezquita, Mezquita.’
For the building is not known as the cathedral; it is still called the
Mosque, although it has been reconsecrated and dedicated to the worship
of God and the Virgin Mother.

Climb to the top of the tower and look around upon the bleached houses
of the city, the curving river, the dull green of the olive thickets,
the yellow grain fields, and the grey ridges of the mountains.
Everything is sharp, clear-cut in the unpolluted air, and glowing in the
brilliant sunshine of the south. The thoroughfares are like a network,
tangled and mazy. Carthaginian hosts crossed those sierras to conquer
this coveted territory from the Iberians. Then came the legions of Rome,
to expel the settlers and to found Corduba. Here stood the great temple
of Janus in the days of Seneca and Lucan, the arena, the schools, and
the institutions of a powerful and cultured people. But all these fell
with the inrush of the Goths from the north, those intrepid warriors,
fanatical as they were fearless; and Cordova saw the ruin of the Roman
civilisation, and the inception of a new faith and a new social order.

The scene changes constantly; the action of the drama is vivid. Again
the invading flood sweeps over Andalusia. The swarthy Moors advance in
battle array to the walls of the city, and the affrighted Cordovese fly
to their churches for hiding. Again there sounds the clash of weapons
and the shouts of combatants. And Islam prevails; the Christian
cathedral is given to the Moors, and the Mezquita takes its place.

For centuries the Omeyyad rules in Cordova, and shapes the city to his
fashion, obliterating almost every trace of the preceding orders,
creeds, and customs. These are the palmy days, whose memorial lies below
us in the Mosque, and the bridge over the Guadalquivir. These are the
days that made Cordova a name familiar in the ears of the civilised
nations, the days of power, splendour, and learning, whose glory shone
throughout the world. The new Mecca arose; the creed of the East
conquered, and Iberia was transformed to the guise of the Orient. And as
the Moorish sway spread, and the conquered Christians conformed to the
new traditions, and the country prospered, men thought that this state
was sound and stable, and probably final and perfect.

But the pendulum swung again; the dominion of Islam was threatened by
enemies within and without. History repeated itself; Time worked its
inevitable revenge, and a lustier race made profit from the decadence of
the Morisco civilisation. Spain arose and turned upon her oppressor,
and the streets of Cordova were once more drenched with the blood of
Moor and Christian. This proud Bell Tower stands as a symbol of the
reconquest, and of the decline of Cordova.

Christian Spain rejoiced in her change of fortune. The crusaders set
themselves to demolish and to upheave. They abandoned the wholesome
habits of the Moors; the baths were destroyed by the hundred as useless
relics of the detested Mohammedan. Temples, colleges, and palaces were
thrown down. Science, the arts, and letters were neglected. We have read
how trade forsook Cordova, and how the light of learning was almost
extinguished. Gone were the cultured days of Abd-er-Rahman III., and the
resplendent pomp of Almanzor. The Mecca of the West had fallen; the fate
of Roman Corduba had come upon it. There was no revival, no uprising of
the ruins from the ashes that could remake Cordova in the semblance of
its old self. Vestiges alone remained to remind the beholder of the
grandeur and the glory of the Mohammedan domination. A misdirected
imperialism, an irrational conception of greatness, wrought the wreckage
of the ‘Bride of Andalus’ after her recapture by the Christian
Spaniards.




VI

THE SPLENDOURS OF THE MOSQUE


Before the rise of Mahomet, the architecture of the Arabs was almost
devoid of those specific characters that we find in the later work of
Omeyyad designers and artists. The pristine Arabian edifices were built
as though the tent served as the model for the architects of this
nomadic race. But in the great Mosque of Omar at Jerusalem we have the
first example of a new and vigorous development of the art of
architecture. The minaret, or praying-tower, was invented by Alwalid,
and other distinctive features of the Moorish or Saracenic style were
introduced in religious buildings.

In the earliest Morisco-Spanish edifices there was not much original
work. The Visigothic temples were reconsecrated to the new faith and
adapted to the plans of the primitive Mohammedan mosques, but the
designs and style of decoration were not purely Morisco. The work was
probably influenced by Persian and ancient Egyptian art, and according
to Señor F. M. Tubino it contained Semitic elements. We shall also note
the incorporation of the Corinthian capital with the slender Moorish
column of marbles of various colours. The characteristic horseshoe arch,
with its delicate columns, was one of the earliest manifestations of the
developing art of the Moors. There has been much discussion concerning
the introduction of the pointed arch, which is so often claimed as
‘Gothic.’ The arch in architecture was no doubt copied from the curved
interlacing of the branches of trees, and the wide, flat arch was
succeeded by models of a more pointed type. In the thirteenth century
the pointed arch was a comparatively common form, and it is fairly
evident that its origin was in the East.

In the Mosque of Jerusalem, and of Amrou, in Cairo, there were early
examples of the pointed arch. The contrary flexure is a form of pointed
arch, and it was used by the Moors. Sir Christopher Wren, and other
authorities upon architectural art, lean to the opinion that the
so-called Gothic arch is of Oriental origin. There are, however, a
number of students who have endeavoured to disprove the Moorish genesis
of the narrow arch.

In the First Period of Morisco architecture, the talent and the energy
of the designers were chiefly applied to the planning of military
defences, towers, walls, and embattlements. The Second Period was one of
greater security from the alarms of wars, and the architects devoted
their art to devising religious structures and noble mosques. In the
Third Period we see the upraising of fine secular buildings, palaces,
dwelling-houses, with their courts and colonnades, and the erection of
sumptuous marble baths.

From the eighth to the eleventh century the style in Spain is known as
the Arab-Spanish, and is sometimes called the Estilo Califato. This
style is ‘Saracenic,’ with Jewish features. In the next period, from the
twelfth to the thirteenth century, we have the Almohade development of
Arabian architecture, whose examples may be seen in most of the Moorish
cities of Spain. The last period--from the fourteenth to the fifteenth
century--which marks the decline of the pure Morisco designs, is
sometimes described as the Alhamares.

The salient characteristics of Moorish architecture are the groves of
slender columns, the interlacing horseshoe arches in bewildering
profusion, the minaret, with its gradually inclined path in lieu of
steps for the ascent, the gorgeous colouring of flat surfaces, the
mosaics, dazzling gildings, and decorations of precious stones and
jewels. It was the Moor who discovered the art of preserving colour and
rendering his adornments imperishable. The flat illuminations were
probably imitations of Egyptian decoration, but it is not certain that
the secret of preserving the lavish and brilliant colours was derived
from Egypt.

In selecting his woods for the purposes of decorating the Mosque of
Cordova, the Moor employed those of the most durable texture, so
durable, indeed, that age has scarcely left its mark upon them. The
bricks and stones are equally lasting, as may be proved by an inspection
of the walls of the Mezquita. There was no hasty work in the
construction of the temple of Allah. Nothing was used except material of
a permanent quality. The treasure of the earth, its forests and its
mountains, was employed in the great labour of duty and devotion.

It has been suggested that the horseshoe arch has a very ancient
symbolic meaning of a Phallic origin. This is, perhaps, not the occasion
for discussing this theory. It is apparent that the Moors employed this
form of decoration upon every opportunity and complicated it in a
variety of styles. They used it in their doorways, aisles, cloisters,
and windows. The Ajimez window is typically Morisco. It has usually from
two to three arches, supported on fine columns, and is exceedingly
graceful in design. Ajimez signifies a window through which the sun or
light shines. For effects of light in the interiors of their fanes the
Morisco architects designed several ingenious apertures, such as the
star-shaped window, through which the daylight peers with singular
weirdness.

The defect of the Mosque of Cordova is in a want of space above the
naves. We lack the grandeur of height within the building. Loftiness
does not seem to have appealed to the designers. The average height of
the columns is about sixteen feet. Length and breadth have, however,
been carefully considered in the construction of the temple, and the
long arched aisles are like forest avenues. There were once one thousand
and twelve columns in the building, but many of these were removed when
San Fernando commanded that the Mezquita should be adapted as a
Christian cathedral.

The Vizier, Almanzor, removed the eastern wall of the Mosque and
extended the building in order to add eight new naves. These naves had
the same number of arches as those already standing, and they were
intersected at right angles with lesser naves, thirty-five in number. At
this period a lack of space necessitated a narrowing of some of the
arches, and the curves were made more pointed. Every conceivable
ornamentation was introduced in the beautifying of these arches.

The _foseyfasa_, or enamel-work of the Moors, is seen in its brilliant
examples in the Mosque. This enamel, called _foseyfasa_ by the Arabs, is
composed of crushed glass and small pebbles baked together with gorgeous
colours, and sometimes containing an admixture of gold and silver. It
was used at Damascus, in the great Mosque, and at Constantinople.
According to Gayangos, this mosaic enamel was set in its place by Greek
mechanics imported by Abd-er-Rahman. This work is finely exampled upon
the entrance to the sanctuary, and throughout the Mosque there are
specimens of this wondrous art of embellishment.

The principal nave of the Mezquita has huge arches on stone columns,
with finely carved capitals, and a large number of minor arches in the
Estilo del Califato. Most of these columns were made from the stone of
Spanish quarries. They are of jasper, marble, and other stone, and
number nearly nine hundred. Narrow avenues run transversely through the
grand aisles. We are lost in them; these passages appear interminable,
and their ribbon decorations bewilder the eyes.

We approach the sacred mih-rab, the receptacle of the Koran, the holiest
of holies of the temple. The façade is exceedingly beautiful, in the
later style of decoration, and the arcades of the vestibule of the
sanctuary have fine triple arches and interlacing curves of exquisite
design. The dome is cone-shaped.

The door is in the Estilo del Califato, dazzling in the wealth of its
colouring, marvellous in the grace and symmetry of its main arch,
trefoil arches, and delicate frets. The mih-rab is seven-sided, with a
cupola of extraordinary richness of hue, and details of the greatest
interest. One is baffled in attempting to describe this sanctuary. The
technical terms of architecture do not convey a conception of its beauty
to the lay mind. In the days of its glory, the mih-rab was illuminated
by an enormous lamp and huge candles. El-Makkari, the Arab, says that
the great lantern had nearly fifteen hundred lights, and that the total
number of lights was over ten thousand. The enamels shone with their
brilliant hues in the rays of these lamp-lights and candles until the
eye could scarcely rest upon the walls and the cupola. Here the khalifs
came in pomp to worship, and to scan reverently the pages of the costly
Koran.

The hollowed roof of the mih-rab and the floor are of white marble. We
may see the marks worn by the knees of the faithful who came hither to
pay their devotions to the Father of Islam. The mosaics of the walls
exhibit the finest designs and richest tones of the _foseyfasa_ work.
This is the third mih-rab, the production of Hakem, and it is a retreat
that speaks eloquently of that piety which seeks to glorify a deity by
the erection and adornment of a temple. It is resplendent beyond
compare.

This chamber was the repository of the famous _nimbar_, a pulpit on
wheels, which had seven steps, and could be moved to any part of the
Mosque. When the Christians regained power in the city, this highly
ornamented pulpit was cut into pieces, and portions of it were used in
the construction of the altar. The superb copy of the Koran, to which we
have referred before, was kept in a golden case, mounted with precious
stones. It was so heavy that two men were required to carry it.

Upon the ceiling of the Mezquita there were formerly inscriptions. Among
them were the command: ‘Be not one of the negligent,’ and the dictum:
‘There is no God but Allah, to whom all beings address themselves in
their need.’ The Christians effaced these inscriptions when the Mosque
was purified and consecrated to the Virgin Mother.

In the Capilla de Villaviciosa we shall see the Arab-Byzantine crossed
arches on decorated columns. This was the retreat of the Khalif, and it
was once lined with silver. The chapel is the only one of Moorish
interest. There are forty-five Christian chapels, but these scarcely
demand inspection. In front of the Capilla of San Pablo is the tomb of
Pablo de Céspedes, the Cordovese painter. This chapel has a horseshoe
arch with sharp points. The Capilla de la Cena contains ‘The Last
Supper,’ painted by Céspedes. And in the Sala Capitular were statues by
Alonso Cano and de Mora.

The chapels were constructed from the side aisles of the Mezquita when
the building was dedicated to the Christian faith. After the capture of
Cordova by San Fernando, the original work of the Moorish builders was
spoiled in many parts of the Mezquita. Large surfaces, beautifully
designed and coloured, were removed by the innovators, columns were
pulled down, and screens destroyed. ‘The gold lavished on the panelled
ceilings,’ so praised by an Arab poet, was obliterated in many places;
the Christian architects wrought havoc in almost every part of the
structure. No doubt the pious reconstructors were unconscious of their
vandalism. They sought to improve upon the art of the Mohammedans, and
to build a worthier edifice. But their failure is only too apparent, and
it has been admitted by Spanish writers. Charles V. expressed sorrow at
the garish and meagre innovations, saying that the designers and
craftsmen had destroyed a great and unique work of art in their
endeavour to improve upon the design of the Moriscos.




VII

THE CATHEDRAL AND CHURCHES


From the time of the taking of Cordova by the sainted King Ferdinand,
Spanish architects and artificers designed and constructed additions to
the interior and exterior of the beautiful Mezquita. We have already
described these additions as often incongruous and for a great part
unlovely. San Fernando caused the erection of the first Christian chapel
within the Mosque, and it occupied a position by the south wall,
covering three naves from east to west, and four transverse naves from
north to south. The chapel, which was dedicated to St. Clement, enclosed
two Moorish arches.

Following the example of the sovereign, several noblemen erected chapels
in the Mezquita. In 1250 Don Diaz de Haro built the chapel of Santa
Inez, and later Domingo Muñoz erected that of San Bartolomé. Enriched by
donations from the pious, the Chapter of the Cathedral undertook to
transform the building, and even sought to improve upon the work of the
Mohammedans. They removed the apartment of the Kadi, destroyed the
chamber of the Khalif, known as the _maksurrah_, and in its place reared
the Grand Chapel. The chapels of St. John and of Santiago were built
between 1260 and 1265.

At this time four Mudejares, or reconciled Moors, were employed upon the
work of altering the Mosque. It was evidently the wish of the improvers
that the Arabic tradition should be followed in the construction of the
arches and the plan of the decorations; but already the Moorish art was
declining, and these latest examples of Morisco design and ornamentation
do not display that wealth of imagination and high skill which
characterised the Omeyyad craftsmanship. Hence the work in the Cathedral
became more ‘Gothic’ and less Arab-Byzantine, as piece by piece the
chapels were added to the structure of Abd-er-Rahman, Hakem II., and
Almanzor.

The worst vandalism was wrought when the great Choir was made under the
sanction of Charles V., who afterwards regretted that he had consented
to the alterations. In order to erect the Coro, with its high roof, the
old Moorish ceiling was destroyed. The architect originally employed
upon the Grand Chapel and Choir was the celebrated Hernan Ruiz, who
achieved some notable designs in the Plateresque style. The retablo, or
high altar, is by Alonso Matias, and the painting is the work of
Palomino.

In the Coro the seats are beautifully carved by Pedro Cornejo. The
Capilla de Nuestra Señora de Villaviciosa is perhaps the most
interesting of the many Christian chapels erected within the Mezquita.
It is in the later Moorish style. Céspedes’ painting of ‘The Last
Supper’ is in the Capilla de la Cena; and the tomb of this artist, who
was a native of the city, is near the Capilla de San Pablo.

In the Christian Cathedral there are many examples of the composite
Moorish and Gothic architecture, which is known in Spain as the Estilo
Mudejar. Portraits of saints and paintings of living things were
introduced later, in contravention of the Mohammedan law forbidding such
representations in the decoration of holy buildings. Statues were also
placed in the Cathedral. The brilliant Plateresque style eventually
succeeded the later Mudejar work; the decorations were fanciful and
flamboyant, and not always inspired by the highest æsthetic sense.
Finally, in the seventeenth century, the Baroque style became the
fashion of the hour, and the arts of pictorial embellishment and of
carving degenerated often into the bizarre and the theatrical. Wood was
used in place of stone for statuary, and many of the fine old
altar-pieces in the Spanish churches were destroyed to give place to
grotesque and more ‘realistic’ conceptions.

As early as 1278 the minaret of Abd-er-Rahman III. was crowned with the
Christian figure of Saint Raphael, and at the time of the alterations
under the direction of Hernan Ruiz the bulk of the Moorish praying-tower
was removed, and the much loftier belfry erected. Most of the beautiful
doors of the Mosque were blocked up during the progress of the
reconstruction. The door of the Gate of Pardon was decorated by Henry
II., and is in the later Mudejar style, with Christian images above it.
Such are among the many examples of the curious blending of Moorish and
Christian forms of design and styles of ornamentation within and without
the Mosque.

For further examples of Mudejar architecture we may visit the Hospital
del Cardinal, where there is a fine chapel dedicated to San Bartolomé.
The Church of Santa Marina was originally Moorish, but it is now modern.
Relatives of the Gran Capitan Gonsalvo are buried in the San Hipolito.




VIII

THE PALACE OF THE KHALIFS AND THE MOORISH BRIDGE


Very little of the ancient Moorish Alcazar remains. On the south side
there are a bath and some towers, and the plot by the river is
beautifully shady with semi-tropical foliage and fruit-trees. The old
Alcazar was originally the Palace of the Khalifs, and it covered a large
area. It contained huge and sumptuous chambers and several handsome
baths, which were destroyed during the reign of Isabella. The northern
part of the building was erected in the time of Alfonso XI., about a
century after the recapture of Cordova by San Fernando.

The gate leading to the bridge is no longer Moorish. It was designed by
a Christian architect. We gain a glimpse of the sierras through the
portal, and passing through, reach the many-arched bridge, leading to
the Campo de la Verdad. The foundations are Roman, and it was probably
built in the time of Cæsar. At the far end is the Calahorra, a
picturesque tower. In the centre stands the shrine of the patron saint
of Cordova, St. Raphael, the archangel.

This bridge was the scene of many conflicts during the Moorish occupancy
of the city. Long before it was built, when Cæsar came to attack
Cordova, he constructed a temporary bridge across the Guadalquivir, by
placing large baskets of stones in the river and laying timber upon
them.

The Moorish water-mills, which can be seen from the bridge, are
interesting relics. The river, the mills, the bell-tower of the Mosque,
and the walls form a picture which lives in the memory. The view lacks
the stern grandeur of that from the Bridge of Toledo, but it is
nevertheless beautiful. In flood-time the river seethes by the
buttresses, and tumbles through the arches to spend itself below in a
wide and imposing stream. And at night, when the moon gleams on the
Guadalquivir, and lights the Mosque, and lingers upon the ancient walls
and towers, the scene is one of fairy-like enchantment.

Men fish above and below the bridge, employing curious lever nets and
other quaint tackle for the capture of shad and eels. Along the verge of
the swirling stream busy women kneel to rinse and wring their linen,
and to spread the garments upon the green banks to dry in the hot sun.
The devout pause before the shrine in the centre of the bridge, and pay
their reverence to St. Raphael. Here, too, loiter the idlers of Cordova;
they lounge and blink at the water, and smoke their cigarettes in the
sunshine. And on market-days there is a stream of pack-mules and asses,
heavy wains with teams of horses, and droves of cattle across the long
Puente.

The spell of Cordova holds one long after leaving the city. One recalls
the white, tortuous alleys, and the luminous blue shadows of the Mosque
at noonday. The odours of orange-bloom and of roses are wafted to the
nostrils, as one thinks of the silent patios, where the footstep echoes,
and the huerta by the river, where there are trees and plants of the
tropics. One hears the rattle of the mule-wagon upon the stony
thoroughfares, the first streets that were ever paved in Spain; the
nightly cry of the watchman, in his mediæval garb; the jangling of
church bells the call of the water-seller, carrying his tall Oriental
jar; the rich liquid tones of the nightingales in the gardens and the
thickets of the Guadalquivir; the early morning scream of the hawk
floating over the bell-tower, and the bleating of the wandering herds
of goats. Cordova is Moorish, Spanish, Andalusian, but, still more than
all, Oriental. Wonderful Moors! Marvellous city of light, colour,
beauty, and romantic memories!




IX

ILLUSTRIOUS NATIVES OF CORDOVA


The ‘holy and learned’ city of Cordova has ever produced sons worthy of
its renown. There were, no doubt, many philosophers, teachers, and poets
during the Mohammedan dominion, whose names have not been preserved, and
whose works have perished. Corduba was the birthplace of Seneca, the
relative and the contemporary of Lucan, and one of the greatest men that
the city produced.

The moralist and philosopher was a delicate, ailing child, and
throughout his life he suffered from ill-health, which was increased by
his severe studies, and possibly by his asceticism. Seneca was one of
the first strenuous advocates of the vegetarian diet and ‘the simple
life.’ It is said that he subsisted upon the plainest fare and practised
rigorous self-denial.

There is much that is admirable in the character of Seneca, but there
are also traits that appear extremely incompatible with his constant
insistence upon right conduct and purity of life.

The genius of Seneca was soon recognised by the rulers in Cordova, and
his fame reached Rome, whither he went, and where he was received with
the respect that his deep learning merited. His career was, however,
checked by his unfortunate intrigue with Julia, the married sister of
the Emperor Caligula. As a punishment for his adultery he was sent to
Corsica, where he lived in banishment for eight years.

During this long spell of solitude Seneca mused and studied, and found
the period of exile one of fruitfulness to the mind. Yet when he was
recalled to Rome, at the intercession of Agrippina, the philosopher
exhibited a keen desire for wealth, which is scarcely reconcilable with
his affirmations concerning the life of simplicity and self-denial. In
order to make money, he did not hesitate to lend sums at an exorbitant
interest. He became a courtier, and was the confidential tutor of Nero;
but at the height of his fortune he conspired against the emperor. His
condonation of Nero’s murder of his mother was an elaborate piece of
casuistry, devised for no other reason than the desire to retain the
royal patronage. In this and in other episodes, the career of Seneca
bewilders us, and provides matter for reflection upon the inconsistency
of human nature and the fallibility of even the greatest ethicists.

The last pages in the life of the philosopher are sad. He was condemned
to death as a traitor, and he had married a young wife. When he heard
that the guards were on their way to arrest him, Seneca resolved to open
one of his veins and to bleed to death. His loyal and loving wife begged
to share his fate, and at her request he cut one of her veins. But
Seneca was old, seventy years of age, and his blood flowed so slowly
that he could not die. In his desperation he drank a cup of hemlock,
hoping to poison himself, and by that means put an end to his anguish.
Yet even the hemlock potion failed. Asphyxiation in a heated chamber at
last brought death to the aged sage, and by timely attention the life of
his young wife was saved.

Marcus Annæus Lucanus, or Lucan, was born in Cordova in the year A.D. 38
or 39. He was the nephew of Seneca, and his father was a public servant
held in esteem in the city. Our data for a biography of Lucanus are very
scanty. He wrote poems before he left Cordova, and encouraged the
writing of Latin verse among the Spanish residents. His great work, the
_Pharsalia_, was left unfinished.

Lucan was lauded by Tacitus as a poet. He went to Rome, and it is
recorded that he vanquished Nero in one of the poetical tournaments in
which that monarch delighted. The egotistic emperor never forgave Lucan
for beating him in this literary contest. He vindictively forbade the
poet to write any more poems or to recite to audiences. We need not be
surprised that the aggrieved poet rebelled against this attempt to
utterly silence his song, to deprive him of the exercise of his art, and
to crush him. Lucan was aroused. He became one of the conspirators of
Piso, and plotted against the power of Nero.

When he was arrested, and offered pardon if he would name his
accomplices in the plot, Lucan falsely accused his mother Atilia of
complicity. This cowardly resort was, however, of no avail. He was not
spared by the vengeful Nero, who gave the poet his choice of death.
Lucan chose the usual Roman mode of opening a vein in a bath. He is said
to have recited one of his poems as he died.

Ibn-Roshid Averroes, the most renowned of the Arabian philosophers, was
born in Cordova in A.D. 1120. He came of a high-born family held in
honour in the city. His grandfather was a Kadi of Cordova. In his youth
Averroes learned law, mathematics, theology, and the practice of
medicine. His reputation as a man of erudition and of force of intellect
caused Almanzor to grant him privileges. He was appointed Kadi of the
city of Seville.

The story of the life of Averroes is an example of the eternal conflict
between the reformer of thought and morals and the mass of the people of
his age. Averroes was misunderstood, impeached as a dangerous heretic,
and condemned as an enemy of humanity. The Moors, in spite of their
culture, could manifest rank fanaticism when they encountered any
teaching that seemed to contradict the writings of the Koran, or the
traditional piety. Averroes was a follower of Aristotle, although he
remained a Mohammedan, and as the Greek philosophy did not accord
completely with the dogmas of Mohammed, the teacher was arraigned as an
assailant of religion and a foe to morality. His ostracism was thorough.
The noble man was pelted with stones by boys in the street, and scorned
by the whole city.

Shrinking from this terrible spectacle of the humiliation and cruelty
heaped upon the innocent head of his revered tutor, the young
Maimonides, a diligent pupil of Averroes, fled from Cordova. Averroes
soon after left the city, and wandered in Morocco. But he was not
allowed to roam unmolested. At Fez the populace treated him with gross
inhumanity. He was forced to stand on the step of the mosque, and every
one who passed into the House of Allah spat in the philosopher’s face.
Hunted, despised, and bereft of the opportunity for using his learning
for the good of humanity, Averroes dissembled and professed to repent of
his heresies. We can hardly experience surprise at this. His humiliation
and his trials had been such that few men could endure without a loss of
reason or a total paralysis of aspiration.

Averroes returned to Cordova. But he was still avoided and looked upon
as a felon, and his poverty and miserable state continued. Eventually he
was reinstated. There was a reaction of feeling; bigotry was wearing
out, and the virtues and attainments of the great thinker were
recognised at their worth. The chief work of Averroes was his
philosophy, compounded of Aristotle and the teaching of Neo-Platonism.
His writings upon Aristotle are not of the highest value, for he was
unversed in the Greek language.

Like Seneca, the Arab teacher Averroes was a rigidly plain liver. He
contented himself with common raiment, slept on hard couches, and made
only one meal in twenty-four hours. Averroes was not only reputed for
his culture and his philosophical treatises; he bore the character of
amiability, simplicity of manner, and extreme courteousness. He rises
far above Seneca in the conduct of life and the application of his
principles to actions. He was a true moral philosopher. Cordova has
produced many illustrious sons, but certainly not a greater man since
his day.

For some time the philosophy of Averroes was regarded as highly
dangerous among the Moors of Cordova. It was considered equally
injurious to the Christian faith, for all the works of the Arab doctor
were placed upon the Catholic Index.

Cordova gave many valiant soldiers to the world, but none more brave
than the Gran Capitan. The hero’s name was Fernandez Gonsalvo, or
Hernandez de Cordova. He was born in 1453, and arose to fame about 1495.
‘Nursed amid the din of battle,’ Gonsalvo accompanied his father to the
courts of Alfonso and Isabella. He fought in Portugal, showing
remarkable intrepidity at the great battle of Albuera. At Monte Frio the
Great Captain led the besiegers in scaling the ramparts. At Granada his
horse was killed beneath him, but he mounted that of his attendant, who
lost his life in the encounter. In the Calabrian campaign, Gonsalvo led
the army. For his prowess he was made Viceroy of Naples.

The life of the Gran Capitan is a chapter of moving romance. In the
Spanish estimation he is almost as mighty and adorable as the Cid.
Gonsalvo was over sixty when he died. He was a born commander, capable
of judging character and of leading men, and possessed of extraordinary
bravery and coolness in action. His manners were urbane and pleasing.

The city is associated with at least three famous painters of the
Andalusian school: Pedro de Cordova, Pablo de Céspedes, and Juan Valdés
Leal. The Museo of Cordova is not a very important collection of
paintings, but it contains some works of Céspedes, Zurbarán, and Ribera.
Zurbarán’s best work is not to be seen in Cordova. Ribera’s ‘Rest on the
Flight into Egypt,’ in the Museo, is a fine picture, but it is injured
by the state into which it has fallen through neglect. It is deplorable
that so many of the paintings in the collection at Cordova are in a
condition of decay. During our visit to the city we were appalled at the
indifference exhibited by those in charge of the pictures.

There is evidence that Cordova under the Moors contained some works of
the early Spanish schools of painting. Pablo de Céspedes, in an essay,
states: ‘In the parish church of San Pedro, in our city of Cordova, on
the right wall, there are many paintings of those times which escaped
the barbarous fury of the Moors when they held that place, though they
have not escaped the ravages of time and the neglect of those intrusted
with the care of the church. The consequence is, they are scarcely
intelligible from the injury which they have received and the dust which
has accumulated upon them. This sort of painting, rude and savage as it
is, appears to have been the ashes whence was destined to spring that
fairest Phœnix of modern art which has since burst forth in such
splendour and riches.’

The first painter of Cordova of whom we have a brief record is Pedro de
Cordoba. In 1475 he painted the Annunciation, which is still to be seen
in the Capilla del Santo Cristo of the Mezquita. The picture is
representative of Gothic art; but it is in a poor light, and the canvas
is in a condition of neglect.

Cordova was ranked as the second centre of art in Andalusia; and the
Italian influence, which succeeded the Gothic, was exemplified in the
productions of the cultured and versatile Pablo de Céspedes, who was
born in the city in 1538. This artist, who wrote a celebrated poem on
the art of painting, is ranked among the writers as well as the painters
of his nation. He studied in Italy, and became one of the canons of the
Cathedral of Cordova. In Rome he painted frescoes after the manner of
Correggio. ‘The Last Supper,’ and two pictures of ‘St. John’ and ‘St.
Andrew,’ are in the Mezquita, and in these we see the intellectual
quality of this painter’s art. Cean Bermudez, the Spanish critic, ranked
Pablo de Céspedes high as a colourist, and especially in flesh-tints.
Most of the pictures by Céspedes have perished.

Juan de Valdés Leal was born in Cordova in 1630. Most of the painter’s
life was spent in Seville, where he was regarded as the rival of
Murillo. His most sincere, and one of his earliest compositions is in
Cordova, in the Church of the Carmen. This work is interesting because
it instances the dramatic qualities of the painter. The retablo is
painted in eleven different parts, representing the life of the prophet
Elijah. Most of the work of Valdés Leal is to be seen in Seville.

Antonio de Castillo y Saavedra, born in Cordova in 1603, revived the
best traditions of Céspedes. Castillo was one of the first of the
Spanish landscape-painters, but his strength lay in the presentment of
figures. His colour is not his _forte_, as will be seen from a study of
his pictures in the Museo. Perhaps his most admirable work is the
‘Denial of St. Peter.’ Castillo unfortunately attempted to imitate
Murillo, and it is said that he was envious of the reputation of that
more popular painter. This artist seems to have spent most of his time
in Cordova, where he died in 1667.

The poet Luis de Gongora was born in the city in 1561. His first studies
were at the University of Salamanca, whither he was sent at the age of
fifteen, to learn law. While at the College he became exceedingly worn
in health, but his disease was not mortal, and his recovery was
accounted miraculous. While still a youth Gongora wrote poetry. He
showed but little aptitude for the profession of lawyer, and upon his
return to Cordova he cultivated his bent for poetry.

In person Luis de Gongora was tall and powerfully built. He was a
caustic writer, and in his first period his style was simple and
delightful. But he became more mannered and affected as he grew older,
and his later work was marred by pomposity, extravagance, and often by
sheer absurdity. His mannerisms were, however, regarded as the fruit of
rare genius by his host of disciples and imitators. Gongorism became the
fashion among poetasters in Spain, and the followers of this master of
eccentricity were slavish flatterers and fanatical worshippers.

At forty-five Gongora left Cordova and entered the Church. He afterwards
lived in Madrid. In the capital he was under the patronage of
influential hidalgos and nobles, and Philip III. made him his honorary
chaplain. Gongora eventually returned to his native place, where he died
at the age of sixty-six, in the year 1627.

In spite of his stilted style and metrical defects, Gongora was endowed
with true poetic talent. Writing of him, Lope de Vega said: ‘I have
known this gentleman for eight-and-twenty years, and I hold him to be
possessed of the rarest and most excellent talent of any in Cordova, so
that he need not yield even to Seneca or Lucan, who were natives of the
same town.’




APPENDIX I

THE GREAT MOSQUE OF CORDOVA


It is not a little singular that the present Cathedral of Cordova is
better known to the inhabitants of the city as _La Mezquita_, or Mosque,
than by its Christian designation; which circumstance may be taken as a
proof of the great influence exerted over Spanish thought and feeling by
the Moorish occupation of the Peninsula.

The truth is that Spanish and Moorish interests had much in common, and
both nations had equal pride in the celebration of notable deeds
performed by Mussulman or Christian. The mingling of the two peoples
after the conquest of Granada gave, at least to the commonalty of both
nations, a spirit of charity which it had been better to foster than to
extinguish.

This gentle sentiment is well expressed in a lament by Amados de los
Rios, a great Spanish antiquary and Orientalist, who sings a mournful
requiem over the departed glories of the Mosque, once the model of Arab
architecture, and the pride of Islam:--

‘Neither the sumptuous Christian fabric that to-day rises in the midst
of those countless columns, nor all the treasures of art lavished upon
it by the celebrated artists of the sixteenth century who erected it,
nor that interminable series of chapels of every epoch which, resting
against the walls of the Mosque, disfigure it; nor the clumsy angels
that seem to suspend their flight to shed glory over the divine service,
nor the words of the Evangelist sounding from the seat of the Holy
Spirit, can dispel or banish in the slightest degree the majesty of
those wandering shades, that in vain seek in the sanctuary the sacred
volume whose leaves, according to tradition, were enamelled with the
blood of the Khalif Othman, martyr to the faith. A world of souvenirs
here enthralls the mind of the traveller as he gazes with a feeling of
sorrow upon these profanations,--works dictated by the intolerant yet
sincere faith of our ancestors, impelled by the desire of banishing for
ever from that spot consecrated to the law of Jesus, the spirit of
Mohammed and the ghosts of his slaves that haunt it, and will for ever
haunt it while it exists. For, in spite of the mutilations it has
endured, and of the changes it has undergone, there is impressed upon
it, by a superior ineradicable law, the seal of the art that inspired
it, and the character of the people by whom it was planned and erected.’

Don Amados is not alone in his eloquent, if unavailing protest. When
Charles V., in 1526, visited Cordova, and observed St. Peter’s (the
Coro) rising out of the very centre of the Mosque, he rebuked the
Bishop, Alonso Manriquez, who had erected the incongruous edifice, in no
measured terms. When the king saw the extent of the mischief, he said:
‘You have built here what you or any one might have built elsewhere; but
you have spoilt what was unique in the world.’ Alas! the monarch had
forgotten, or did not choose to remember, that the declaration came with
a very bad grace from one who, for his never-completed palace at
Granada, had torn down whole Courts and Halls of the Alhambra.

Like most Moorish buildings, the exterior of the Great Mosque of Cordova
has a somewhat forbidding aspect, and rises before one much unlike a
house of prayer.

The vast interior of the Mosque may be likened to a petrified grove of
palm-trees, their stems strangely varied in colour, and in amazing
perspective to all points of the compass. Marble columns of every hue,
from pure white and translucent alabaster, through the intervening red,
the precious verde antique, jasper, porphyry, all shades, to the deepest
black; the variety only to be explained by the fact that the great
builders Abd-er-Rahman I., together with his son and successor, Hisham
I., procured their materials whenever and wherever they could ‘acquire’
them. Many of the columns being too tall, were ‘topped’ to supply a
deficiency in the length of another--a process eloquent of the pillage
of many a distant city.[1]

All historians agree that the great Mosque of Cordova owes its inception
to Abd-er-Rahman I., the first sovereign to reign independently over
Andalus. Directly the Sultan found himself comparatively free from his
turbulent rivals, and firmly established on the throne, he began the
building of his royal palace--that of the pleasure-house called
Rissafah, and of the great Mosque. The circumstances which led to the
erection of the Mosque are thus related:--

When a city surrendered to the Moors by capitulation, it was their
custom to divide with the Christians the principal temple of that city.
So, for instance, when Damascus was taken, the principal temple was
divided, half of it remaining in the hands of the inhabitants for their
form of worship, while the other half was appropriated to the use of the
Moslems, who forthwith converted their moiety into a Mosque.

According to this usage, when the Arabs entered Cordova they divided
with the Christians their principal place of worship, all other
churches, both within and without the city, being immediately pulled
down. The Moslems remained for a long time satisfied with this state of
affairs, until their number increased, and Cordova became a very
populous city, owing to the Arabian Amirs having taken up their abode in
it, and made it the seat of Government. The Mosque could then no longer
contain the worshippers, and roof after roof was added to accommodate
them, the roof of each successive addition being inferior in height to
the preceding structure, until the roof of the latest addition was so
low as to be but a few feet from the floor, preventing the people from
standing with any comfort under it.

Upon the consolidation of the Omeyyah dynasty, Abd-er-Rahman at once
turned his attention to the enlargement of the Mosque. He sent for the
chiefs of the Christian Church, and proposed to purchase from them that
part of the building which remained in their hands, in order that he
might utilise the space for the better observance of the religion of the
Prophet.

After much negotiation, the Christians agreed to relinquish their
moiety, on condition of being allowed to rebuild or repair a church
outside the walls, and of holding it independently of the Moslems. The
church of the Christians was consecrated wholly to the worship of their
God.[2] This being granted by Abd-er-Rahman, and the Christians having
received the sum agreed upon, the Sultan demolished the old place of
worship (A.D. 784-5), and laid upon its site the foundations of the
great Mosque, which became one of the wonders of the world.

The building was carried on with incredible activity during the whole of
his reign, for the Sultan begrudged no expenditure that could add to its
magnificence; yet it was not until nine years after the death of
Abd-er-Rahman that the Mosque was completed according to the original
plan. The design was accomplished by the Sultan Hisham I. in the years
794-5, and the Mosque received considerable improvements at the hands of
his successors; indeed, it can be safely said that none of the Sultans
of the illustrious family of Omeyyah who reigned in Cordova failed to
make some estimable addition, or contributed in some way to the
decoration of the sumptuous building. Hisham’s son, Abd-er-Rahman II.
(A.D. 822-852), ordered much ‘gilt work’ (_Zak-hrafah_) to be made, but
died before the work was carried out. Mohammed, his son and successor
(A.D. 852-886), continued the work begun by his father, and brought it
to a close. Mohammed’s son, Mundhir, in a short reign (A.D. 886-888), is
recorded as having made improvements in the building. The great Khalif,
An-nassir (Abd-er-Rahman III., A.D. 912-961), caused the old minaret to
be pulled down and a more magnificent one to be erected. Al-hakem
Al-mustanser-billah (Hakem II., A.D. 961-976) made important additions.
Seeing, on his accession, that Cordova was every day increasing in
extent, and the population rapidly growing, he directed his attention to
the enlargement of the Mosque, and completed the additional building
known by his name, by which the structure, already gorgeous, reached the
highest perfection, the work of his time being executed in a manner that
bewilders by its excellence.

Lastly, in the reign of his successor Hisham II. (A.D. 976-1009), and
under the administration of his famous _Hajib_ (Lord Chamberlain and
Prime Minister) Al-Mansur, or Almanzor, as he is more commonly called,
an addition was made which almost doubled the capacity of the building.
A vast number of houses were pulled down, the sites and the lands
belonging to them appropriated for the extension of the Mosque; the
addition falling nowise short, in respect of solidity, beauty of design,
and boldness of execution, of those of any of his predecessors, unless
we except the transcendent work of Hakem II.

The grace and purity of construction and decoration in Cordova reached
their zenith during the reign of Hakem II. He it was who built the
_maksurrah_[3] within the Mosque, a production that has been described
by contemporary writers as one of the most exquisite fabrics ever raised
by man. In the two jambs of the arch forming the entrance to the
_mih-rab_[4] were four columns of great value: two were made of green
marble, the other two of lapis-lazuli.[5]

Near the mih-rab there once stood a pulpit constructed by Hakem II.,
equalled by none other in the world for workmanship and materials. It
was built of ivory and the rarest woods, such as ebony, sandal, almond,
Indian plantain, citron, aloe, and so forth. This beautiful object was
to be seen in the Cathedral of Cordova as late as the middle of the
sixteenth century, when it was dismembered and its materials employed in
the construction of a Christian altar. It was known to the
Spaniards under the name of _carro de Almanzor_, the chariot of
Al-mansur--probably because it stood upon wheels.

Not only did the Khalif Hakem II. make many additions to the great
Mosque of Cordova, but improvements which greatly benefited the city. In
place of the old reservoir for purification in the Court of the Mosque,
he built four others at two sides of the Mosque, and these he filled by
means of a canal which, taking the water from the hills of Cordova,
poured it into an immense reservoir of marble which fed the four minor
cisterns. These marble receptacles for water may yet be seen in the
Mezquita of Cordova; the quarry whence they were extracted is likewise
indicated by the peasants at a few miles from the city. The water,
running constantly, after supplying the needs of the Mosque, was
distributed into three conduits parting from three sides of the Mosque,
East, North, and West, thus supplying the city and suburbs.

The actual dimensions of the Mosque are difficult to establish. An
excellent authority says that in length from North to South, the Mosque
measures six hundred and twenty feet, in width four hundred and forty
feet. Mr. Waring, in his _Notes of an Architect in Spain_ says the
Mosque is an oblong of three hundred and ninety-four feet by three
hundred and sixty feet. The famous Orange Court is in length two hundred
and twenty feet, and, being within the boundary walls of the Mosque, is
probably included in the first measurement given.

It is impossible to fix with any degree of certainty the number of
columns contained in the Mosque during the time of Mohammedan supremacy.
Ambrosio de Morales and the Infante Don Juan Manuel, both of whom
described the Mosque before the columns were reduced in number by the
unnecessary, not to say barbarous, alterations to which the building has
been subjected, estimate the figures at one thousand and twelve; but it
is only too certain that when the Mosque was converted into a Christian
Church very many columns were removed to make room for altars, chapels,
and the like.

No less than one hundred columns were comprised within the _maksurrah_,
which was further provided with three doors of exquisite workmanship,
one of which was covered with pure gold, as were the walls of the
_mih-rab_. The floor of the _maksurrah_, it is said, was paved with
silver, and that the pavements adjacent to it were covered with
_sofeysafa_, an obscure word which Don Pascual de Gayangos believes to
be a transposition of the Arabic word _foseyfasa_,[6] signifying enamel
work of exceptional brilliancy, laid down by Greek workmen whom
Abd-er-Rahman had brought to Cordova for the task.

The ceiling of the Mosque was formerly covered with oval cartouches
bearing appropriate monitory inscriptions and pious sentences, such as
‘Be not one of the negligent,’ ‘Felicity,’ ‘Blessing,’ ‘There is no God
but God, to whom all beings address themselves in their need,’ thus
inciting the minds of the faithful to contemplation and prayer. Some few
of the cartouches are still remaining, but the inscriptions were
carefully effaced at the time when the Mosque was transformed into a
Christian temple. Those in the _mih-rab_, and in the angles near the
tower, were spared.

The number of brazen chandeliers of different sizes in the Mosque is
computed at upwards of two hundred, and the number of cups attached and
containing oil, at upwards of seven thousand. Some of the oil-reservoirs
for the great lamps were Christian bells deprived of their clappers,
afterwards inverted, and suspended from the roof. It is known that in
the many expeditions against the Christian, bells were frequently
removed from their churches and brought to Cordova. Sometimes the metal
of the bells was recast into forms more in accordance with the Moorish
style of ornament.




APPENDIX II

CORDOVA


The most elegant description of Cordova is that contained in the epistle
of Ash-shakandi, a native of Shakandah, a town close to Cordova, on the
southern bank of the Guadalquivir. He calls Cordova ‘the repository of
science, the minaret of piety and devotion, the abode of magnificence,
superiority, and elegance: neither Baghdad nor Damascus can compete with
it. An idea of its worth can only be arrived at by comparing the city to
a beautiful bride of whose dower it should form part. Cordova may be
properly called the military camp of Andalus, the common _rendezvous_ of
those splendid armies which, with the help of Allah, defeated at every
encounter the worshippers of the Crucified. Its great Mosque, lighted
with bronze lamps made from Christian bells, had its foundations formed
of the materials of demolished churches brought to Cordova by Christian
captives.’

During the reigns of the monarchs of Gothic descent, Cordova cannot be
said to have been the capital of Andalus, for although it served as a
place of temporary residence for some of their kings, it was not,
properly speaking, the court of the empire. By the establishment of
Islam within it, its importance increased; the city became the capital
of the Mohammedan empire in Spain and the stronghold of the family of
Merwan,[7] the two important cities of Seville and Toledo quickly
acknowledging its pre-eminence.

Upon the coming of the Beni Omeyyah, its Sultans exalted Cordova above
any city of Andalus, by reason of its convenient situation and
delightful temperature. In course of time Cordova became, says
El-Makkari, ‘the meeting-place of the learned from all countries, and
owing to the power and splendour of the mighty dynasty that ruled over
it, it contained more excellences than any other city on the face of the
earth.’

There is a highly characteristic anecdote of the relative merits of
Cordova and Seville, the refined society of the one city being devoted
to literature, while that of the other was dedicated to music. ‘When a
rich man dies at Seville,’ says a native writer, ‘and his heirs desire
to sell his library, it is sent to Cordova for disposal; when, on the
other hand, a musician dies at Cordova and his instruments are to be
sold, the custom is to send them to Seville.’

A Mohammedan author of the twelfth century of our era, Al-hijárí, Abu
Mohammed, wrote a description of Cordova in a volume called _Al-mishab_,
‘The Chatterer,’ in which he describes the glories of the city.
‘Cordova,’ says he, ‘was, during the reign of the Beni-Merwan, the
cupola of Islam, the convocation of scholars, the court of the Sultans
of the family of Omeyyah, and the residence of the most illustrious
tribes of Yemen. Students from all parts of the world flocked thither at
all times to learn the sciences of which Cordova was the most noble
repository, and to derive knowledge from the mouths of the doctors and
_ulemas_ who swarmed in it. Cordova is to Andalus what the head is to
the body. Its river is one of the finest in the world, now gliding
slowly through level lawns, or winding softly across emerald fields
sprinkled with flowers, and serving it for robes; now flowing through
thickly planted groves, where the song of birds resounds perpetually in
the air, and now widening into a majestic stream to impart its waters to
the numerous wheels constructed on its banks, communicating fresh vigour
to the land.’

The extent of ancient Cordova has been differently stated, owing, no
doubt, to the rapid increase of its population and the expansion of the
buildings under the Sultans of the dynasty of Merwan on the one hand,
and on the other, to the calamities and disasters by which it was
afflicted under the last sovereigns of that house. Cordova is further
described by Mohammedan writers as a city which never ceased augmenting
in size, and increasing in importance from the time of its subjugation
by the Moslems until A.D. 1009-10, when, civil war breaking out within
it, the capital fell from its ancient splendour, gradually decaying and
losing its former magnificence until its final destruction A.D. 1236,
when it fell into the hands of the Christians.

[Illustration: PLATE 1.

VIEW OF THE CITY AND THE BRIDGE SOUTH OF THE GUADALQUIVIR.]

[Illustration: PLATE 2.

THE BRIDGE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 3.

VIEW OF MOSQUE AND BRIDGE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 4.

THE IRON MILL ON THE GUADALQUIVIR.]

[Illustration: PLATE 5.

PROMENADE OF “GRAND CAPITAINE.”]

[Illustration: PLATE 6.

MARKET STREET OR CALLE DE LA FERIA.]

[Illustration: PLATE 7.

PLAZA DEL TRIUNFO AND EXTERIOR OF THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 8.

ENTRANCE GATE OF THE CITY, THE COLUMN OF TRIUMPH, AND THE MOSQUE FROM
THE BRIDGE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 9.

THE COLUMN OF TRIUMPH.]

[Illustration: PLATE 10.

ANCIENT ARAB TOWER, NOW THE CHURCH OF ST NICHOLAS DE LA VILLA.]

[Illustration: PLATE 11.

THE TOWER OF SAN NICOLAS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 12.

TOWER OF THE CATHEDRAL AND PATIO DE LOS NARANJOS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 13.

VIEW OF THE PATIO DE LOS NARANJOS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 14.

THE TOWER OF THE CATHEDRAL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 15.

ENTRANCE TO THE CITY FROM THE BRIDGE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 16.

PUBLIC FOUNTAIN IN THE PATIO DE LOS NARANJOS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 17.

WOMEN AT THE SPRING.]

[Illustration: PLATE 18.

SPRING IN THE PATIO DE LOS NARANJOS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 19.

PEASANT WITH HIS DONKEY.]

[Illustration: PLATE 20.

A WATER-CARRIER.]

[Illustration: PLATE 21.

THE POOR MAN’S MEAL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 22.

MULETEERS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 23.

A GARDENER.]

[Illustration: PLATE 24.

GIRL WITH A GUITAR.]

[Illustration: PLATE 25.

A ROOM IN THE PROVINCIAL MUSEUM.

VIEW OF THE ROMAN AND VISIGOTH SECTION.]

[Illustration: PLATE 26.

A ROOM IN THE PROVINCIAL MUSEUM.

VIEW OF THE ARAB SECTION.]

[Illustration: PLATE 27.

DOOR OF THE HOUSE OF THE INNOCENTS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 28.

THE DOOR OF DON JERÓNIMO PÁEZ.]

[Illustration: PLATE 29.

THE DOOR OF THE FOUNDLING HOSPITAL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 30.

THE TOWER OF CARRAHOL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 31.

PORCH OF ST PAUL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 32.

ANCIENT ARAB WALLS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 33.

MOSAIC OF THE FOUR SEASONS, IN THE HOUSE OF S.S. LUQUE, PLAZA DE LA
COMPANIA.]

[Illustration: PLATE 34.

ARCHITECTURAL PARTS OF THE CATHOLIC BASILICAS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 35.

CAPITALS AND FRAGMENTS OF ORNAMENTATION IN THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 36.

ARCHITECTURAL PARTS OF THE CATHOLIC BASILICAS AND OTHER CONSTRUCTIONS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 37.

CAPITALS OF THE CATHOLIC BASILICAS PRESERVED IN THE MOSQUE, NOW THE
CATHEDRAL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 38.

FRAGMENTS OF THE CATHOLIC BASILICAS PRESERVED IN THE MOSQUE, NOW THE
CATHEDRAL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 39.

GENERAL VIEW OF THE CHOIR AND HIGH ALTAR.]

[Illustration: PLATE 40.

PULPIT AND STEPS OF THE HIGH ALTAR.]

[Illustration: PLATE 41.

CHOIR STALLS IN THE MOSQUE OR CATHEDRAL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 42.

LEFT SIDE OF THE CHOIR STALLS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 43.

GENERAL VIEW OF THE CHOIR IN THE MOSQUE OR CATHEDRAL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 44.

THE BISHOP’S STALL IN THE CHOIR OF THE MOSQUE OR CATHEDRAL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 45.

CENTRAL NAVE IN THE CATHEDRAL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 46.

CENTRAL NAVE IN THE CATHEDRAL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 47.

CENTRAL NAVE IN THE CATHEDRAL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 48.

PLAN OF THE MOSQUE IN THE TIME OF THE ARABS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 49.

II.

PLAN OF THE MOSQUE AT THE PRESENT TIME.]

[Illustration: PLATE 50.

THE BISHOP’S GATE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 51.

ENTRANCE TO THE MOSQUE, CALLED THE GATE OF CAMÓNIGOS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 52.

THE TOWER OF MALA MUERTE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 53.

THE CATHEDRAL. VIEW OF THE TRANSVERSE NAVE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 54.

NORTH ANGLE OF THE CHAPEL OF VILLAVICIOSA.]

[Illustration: PLATE 55.

THE CENTRAL NAVE OF THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 56.

THE GATE OF PARDON.]

[Illustration: PLATE 57.

THE GATE OF PARDON.]

[Illustration: PLATE 58.

THE GATE OF PARDON.]

[Illustration: PLATE 59.

THE GATE OF PARDON.]

[Illustration: PLATE 60.

KNOCKER ON THE GATE OF PARDON.]

[Illustration: PLATE 61.

PRINCIPAL NAVE AND MIHRAB OF THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 62.

ENTRANCE TO THE CHAPEL OF THE MIHRAB.]

[Illustration: PLATE 63.

INTERIOR VIEW OF THE MOSQUE (FROM A DRAWING).]

[Illustration: PLATE 64.

GENERAL VIEW OF THE INTERIOR OF THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 65.

INTERIOR OF THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 66.

INTERIOR OF THE CATHEDRAL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 67.

INTERIOR OF THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 68.

INTERIOR OF THE CATHEDRAL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 69.

GENERAL VIEW OF THE CHAPEL OF VILLAVICIOSA.]

[Illustration: PLATE 70.

INTERIOR OF THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 71.

INTERIOR OF THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 72.

LATERAL DOOR OF THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 73.

THE VILLAVICIOSA CHAPEL IN THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 74.

EXTERIOR OF THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 75.

THE MOSQUE.

PORTAL ON THE NORTH SIDE, MOORISH STYLE, BUILT UNDER HAKEM III.,
988-1001.]

[Illustration: PLATE 76.

CHAPEL OF TRASTAMARA, SOUTH SIDE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 77.

GENERAL VIEW OF THE CHAPEL OF THE MIHRAB.]

[Illustration: PLATE 78.

FAÇADE AND GATE OF ALMANZOR.]

[Illustration: PLATE 79.

THE MOSQUE.

ELEVATION OF THE GATE OF THE SANCTUARY OF THE KORAN.]

[Illustration: PLATE 80.

GATE CORRESPONDING TO THE BUILDING OF ALHAKEM II.]

[Illustration: PLATE 81.

PORTAL OF THE MIHRAB.]

[Illustration: PLATE 82.

ARCADE OF THE ENTRANCE TO THE VESTIBULE OF THE MIHRAB.]

[Illustration: PLATE 83.

ARAB TRIBUNAL (NOW THE VILLAVICIOSA CHAPEL), LEFT SIDE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 84.

RIGHT LATERAL PORTAL, WITHIN THE PRECINCT OF THE MAKSURRAH.]

[Illustration: PLATE 85.

DETAIL OF THE HALL OF CHOCOLATE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 86.

EXTERIOR OF THE CHAPEL OF THE MIHRAB.]

[Illustration: PLATE 87.

DETAIL. ARCHES OF THE MIHRAB.]

[Illustration: PLATE 88.

DETAIL IN THE CHAPEL OF THE MAKSURRAH.]

[Illustration: PLATE 89.

MOSAIC DECORATION OF THE SANCTUARY.]

[Illustration: PLATE 90.

GENERAL VIEW OF THE INTERIOR OF THE CHAPEL OF THE MAKSURRAH AND ST
FERDINAND.]

[Illustration: PLATE 91.

DETAIL NEAR THE MIHRAB.]

[Illustration: PLATE 92.

DETAIL OF THE INTERIOR OF THE MIHRAB.]

[Illustration: PLATE 93.

VERTICAL SECTION OF THE DOME AND CUPOLA OF THE MIHRAB.]

[Illustration: PLATE 94.

DETAIL OF THE TRASTAMARA CHAPEL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 95.

DETAIL OF THE HIGHER PART AND ROOF OF THE CHAPEL OF ST FERDINAND.]

[Illustration: PLATE 96.

SECTIONS OF THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 97.

SECTIONS OF THE MOSQUE AND CATHEDRAL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 98.

DETAIL IN THE CHAPEL OF TRASTAMARA, SOUTH SIDE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 99.

DETAIL IN THE ANGLE OF THE ARCH OF THE MIHRAB, LEFT SIDE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 100.

DETAIL IN THE ANGLE OF THE ARCH OF THE MIHRAB, RIGHT SIDE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 101.

DETAIL OF THE GATE OF THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 102.

KUFIC INSCRIPTION OF THE TIME OF THE KHALIFATE, FOUND IN AN
EXCAVATION.]

[Illustration: PLATE 103.

THE MOSQUE. KUFIC INSCRIPTION IN THE PALACE APPROPRIATED TO THE
PERFORMANCE OF ABLUTIONS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 104.

ARABIAN INSCRIPTIONS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 105.

ARABIAN INSCRIPTIONS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 106.

BASEMENT PANEL OF THE FAÇADE OF THE MIHRAB.]

[Illustration: PLATE 107.

MARBLE SOCLE IN THE MIHRAB.]

[Illustration: PLATE 108.

EXTERIOR OF THE CHAPEL OF SAN PEDRO, NORTH SIDE, IN THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 109.

A GATE ON ONE OF THE LATERAL SIDES.]

[Illustration: PLATE 110.

A KUFIC INSCRIPTION ON THE ADDITIONS MADE TO THE MOSQUE, BY ORDER OF THE
KHALIF AL-HAKEM.]

[Illustration: PLATE 111.

A KUFIC INSCRIPTION ON THE ADDITIONS MADE TO THE MOSQUE, BY ORDER OF THE
KHALIF AL-HAKEM.]

[Illustration: PLATE 112.

CAPITALS. ENTRANCE ARCH.]

[Illustration: PLATE 113.

DETAIL OF A FRIEZE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 114.

DETAIL OF A CORNICE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 115.

DETAIL OF A CORNICE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 116.

EASTERN SIDE OF THE EXTERIOR OF THE MOSQUE, AND DETAIL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 117.

PLAN OF THE ARCH AND CUPOLA OF THE MIHRAB.]

[Illustration: PLATE 118.

DETAIL OF THE PORTALS OF THE MAKSURRAH.]

[Illustration: PLATE 119.

SECTION AND DETAILS OF THE MIHRAB OF THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 120.

DETAILS OF THE CUPOLA OF THE VESTIBULE OF THE MIHRAB.]

[Illustration: PLATE 121.

THE GATE OF PARDON.

THE BISHOP’S GATE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 122.

THE MOSQUE.

DETAIL OF THE TRASTAMARA CHAPEL.

THE MOSQUE.

THE GATE OF THE SULTAN.]

[Illustration: PLATE 123.

THE MOSQUE.

INTERIOR OF THE MIHRAB.

THE MOSQUE.

ARAB ARCADE ABOVE THE FIRST MIHRAB.]

[Illustration: PLATE 124.

INTERIOR OF THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 125.

INTERIOR OF THE CHAPEL OF SAN FERNANDO.]

[Illustration: PLATE 126.

GATE OF THE CATHEDRAL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 127.

PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE TO THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 128.

THE MOSQUE.

TRASTAMARA CHAPEL, SOUTH SIDE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 129.

EASTERN FAÇADE OF THE MOSQUE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 130.

PATIO DE LOS NARANJOS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 131.

CALLE DEL CARDINAL HERRERO.]

[Illustration: PLATE 132.

TOWER OF THE CATHEDRAL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 133.

THE MOSQUE. PULPIT OF THE ANGEL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 134.

THE MOSQUE. PULPIT OF THE BULL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 135.

CATHEDRAL. CHOIR STALLS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 136.

CATHEDRAL. PRINCIPAL NAVE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 137.

GATE OF ST CATHARINE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 138.

ALTAR OF SAN RAFAEL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 139.

THE HOUSE OF PÁEZ.]

[Illustration: PLATE 140.

GENERAL VIEW OF THE ROMAN BRIDGE AND CALAHORRA OVER THE GUADALQUIVIR,
TAKEN FROM THE ARAB MILL.]

[Illustration: PLATE 141.

CALAHORRA CASTLE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 142.

GENERAL VIEW OF THE ROMAN CASTLE OF THE CALAHORRA.]

[Illustration: PLATE 143.

ENTRANCE GATE TO THE ROMAN BRIDGE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 144.

ALMODÓVAR GATE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 145.

THE MILLS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 146.

GENERAL VIEW AND ROMAN BRIDGE OVER THE GUADALQUIVIR.]

[Illustration: PLATE 147.

GRATING AND COURT OF A PRIVATE HOUSE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 148.

AVENUE OF THE GRAND CAPTAIN.]

[Illustration: PLATE 149.

DISTRICT AND CHURCH OF SAN LORENZO.]

[Illustration: PLATE 150.

GENERAL VIEW OF THE BANK AND THE ROMAN BRIDGE OVER THE GUADALQUIVIR.]

[Illustration: PLATE 151.

INTERIOR OF THE PLAZA DE TOROS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 152.

HORTICULTURAL GARDENS.]

[Illustration: PLATE 153.

THE BANK OF THE GUADALQUIVIR FROM THE BRIDGE.]

[Illustration: PLATE 154.

GENERAL VIEW OF CORDOVA.]

[Illustration: PLATE 155.

COURTYARD OF AN INN.]

[Illustration: PLATE 156.

A STREET AND COUNTRY TYPES.]

[Illustration: PLATE 157.

A STREET AND COUNTRY TYPES.]

[Illustration: PLATE 158.

ANCIENT RECEPTACLE FOR WATER OF MEDINA AZ-ZAHIRA, 10TH CENTURY.]

[Illustration: PLATE 159.

CORDOVA

_Specially drawn for The Spanish Series_]


FOOTNOTES:

[1] It is said that many of the pillars were brought from the plunder
of Narbonne, the French town on the Mediterranean.

[2] The new Christian Church was dedicated to SS. Faustus and Marcial.
The priests quitted their Cathedral peacefully, bearing in procession
the relics and images of the saints.

[3] _The maksurrah_ is a screen or enclosure surrounding the _mih-rab_,
with a sort of throne or platform where the Sultan sits, elevated above
the level of the Mosque. The whole of that space which was taken up by
the _maksurrah_ is now occupied by the chapel of St. Estevan.

[4] The _mih-rab_ is a recess having a cavity within one of its walls,
wherein stood that copy of the Koran held in highest veneration. The
cavity also marked that point of the compass towards which stands the
_Ka’bah_, the object of veneration at Mecca.

[5] The four columns are yet in place in what is now the chapel of St.
Peter. Behind the mih-rab at Cordova was a room where other copies of
the Koran were kept. Both the sanctuary, and the mih-rab room, now
form part of St. Peter’s Chapel, which the inhabitants vulgarly call
La Capilla del Zancarron--the chapel of the shin-bone--from a popular
belief that the shin-bone of the Prophet was there preserved.

[6] _Foseyfasa._--Gayangos tells us that the word is not in the
dictionaries, but that, according to an old Arabian writer, it is
a substance of glass and small pebbles crushed and baked together,
uniting, with great variety of colour, great brilliancy and beauty;
it is sometimes mixed with silver and gold. One of the conditions of
peace granted to the Emperor of Constantinople by the Khalif Al-walid
was that the Emperor should provide a certain quantity of _foseyfasa_
or enamelled work for the great Mosque at Damascus. Idrísí, in his
description of the Mosque of Cordova, says that the enamel which
covered the walls of the _mih-rab_ came from Constantinople.

[7] Merwan, the last Khalif at Damascus of the Beni Omeyyah dynasty,
was the ancestor of Abd-er-Rahman I.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Cordova; A city of the Moors, by 
Albert F. Calvert and Walter M. Gallichan

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CORDOVA; A CITY OF THE MOORS ***

***** This file should be named 58831-0.txt or 58831-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/8/3/58831/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
</doc>
<doc id="file28566142" filename="64752-0.txt" parent_folder="History" url="https://www.gutenberg.org/files/64752/64752-0.txt">
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Life of Cervantes, by Albert F. Calvert

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Life of Cervantes

Author: Albert F. Calvert

Release Date: March 08, 2021 [eBook #64752]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             available at The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF CERVANTES ***




                        THE LIFE OF CERVANTES.




                          BY THE SAME AUTHOR.


                        “IMPRESSIONS OF SPAIN.”
                        “THE ALHAMBRA.”
                        “THE DISCOVERY OF AUSTRALIA.”
                        “THE EXPLORATION OF AUSTRALIA.”
                        “MY FOURTH TOUR IN AUSTRALIA.”
                        “BACON AND SHAKESPEARE.”
                        “THE POLITICAL VALUE OF OUR COLONIES.”

           [Illustration: signature: _Miguel Cerbantes Saavedra_]




                              THE LIFE OF
                              CERVANTES.

                         BY ALBERT F. CALVERT.

                      WITH NUMEROUS PORTRAITS AND
                       REPRODUCTIONS FROM EARLY
                       EDITIONS OF DON QUIXOTE.
                       THE TERCENTENARY EDITION.


                      JOHN LANE, THE BODLEY HEAD,
                     LONDON AND NEW YORK, MDCCCCV.




         _E. Goodman and Son, Phœnix Printing Works, Taunton._




PREFACE.


Three hundred years ago this month the First Part of _El Ingenioso
Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha_ was published in Madrid, and the world
was made the richer by a book which will last until “the silver chord be
loosed or the golden bowl be broken”; until the earth relapses into its
original silence and language is no more spoken or read. It is somewhat
late to weave new laurels for the brow of Miguel de Cervantes
Saavedra--the last word on _Don Quixote_ has been spoken. The great
contemporary of Shakespeare has long since come into his own among the
world’s heroes; no country has forborne to do him honour; no literature
is complete that does not contain a translation of his book.

But while the career of Cervantes forms as eventful and varied a history
as that of the Knight-errant of La Mancha himself--_Don Quixote_ might
even be read as the sequel of its author’s life--the number of
biographies of the Spanish writer in the English tongue is curiously
limited. It is ten years since Mr. Henry Edward Watts--whose recent
demise will be regretted by all Cervantists in this country--issued his
new and revised edition of the _Life and Works of Cervantes_, and the
scholarly and deeply-interesting _Life_ by Mr. James Fitzmaurice-Kelly,
Cervantes’ most brilliant and discriminating biographer, is already a
rare and almost unobtainable work.

Several hundred works of biography, commentary, and criticism of
Cervantes’ life and writings have been published in various languages,
yet I am not without hope that this modest contribution may find an
unoccupied niche in the broad gallery of Cervantist literature. I have
no new data to offer, but I have put forward my conclusions, where they
traverse the judgment of other authors, with all reserve; and on points
of fact I have accepted the verdict of the majority of my authorities.
Wherever I have quoted, and I have had much resource to Mr.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly and others, I have acknowledged my indebtedness; and I
have endeavoured to keep always in view my object to present a concise,
accurate, and readable life of Cervantes.

I confess that I have less diffidence in submitting for the approval of
my readers the illustrations which grace this little book. The
reproductions of the title pages of various of Cervantes’ books, and the
original illustrations to _Don Quixote_, will recommend themselves to
lovers of letters and of Cervantes; and, in default of an authentic
likeness of our author, I offer a choice of all the best-known attempts
to repair the omission.

                                                               A. F. C.

“ROYSTON,” HAMPSTEAD, N.W.,

        JANUARY, 1905.




CONTENTS.


                                                       PAGES

THE LIFE OF MIGUEL DE CERVANTES                      1 TO 87

THE PROVERBS OF CERVANTES                           89 TO 97

CHRONOLOGICAL REPERTOIRE OF DOCUMENTS RELATING
TO THE LIFE OF CERVANTES                           99 TO 110

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF DON QUIXOTE--

SPANISH EDITIONS                                  111 TO 125

ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS                              125 TO 133

LIST OF BIBLIOGRAPHIES OF CERVANTES, ARRANGED
CHRONOLOGICALLY                                   135 TO 138

SYNOPSIS OF THE EDITIONS OF DON QUIXOTE                  139




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                             FACING PAGE

PORTRAIT OF CERVANTES, PHOTOGRAVURE                        _Frontispiece_

PORTRAIT OF THE FIGURE IN PACHECO’S PICTURE AT
SEVILLE, SUPPOSED TO REPRESENT CERVANTES                               4

CERVANTES                                                          8, 12

PORTRAIT OF CERVANTES, MODELLED BY ROSENDO NOBAS,
UNDER THE DIRECTION OF DON LEOPOLD RIUS                               16

MIGUEL DE CERVANTES SAAVEDRA                                          20

PORTRAIT OF CERVANTES, PHOTOGRAVURE                                   24

STATUE OF CERVANTES, AT MADRID                                        28

FACSIMILE. LETTER FROM CERVANTES TO THE ARCHBISHOP
OF TOLEDO                                                             32

TITLE PAGE. GALATEA. FIRST PART. MADRID, 1585                         34

TITLE PAGE. GALATEA, FIRST PART. 1590                                 36

TITLE PAGE. DON QUIXOTE. MADRID, 1605                                 38

TITLE PAGE. EXEMPLARY NOVELS. MADRID, 1613                            40

TITLE PAGE. DON QUIXOTE. PARIS, 1614                                  42

TITLE PAGE. VIAGE DEL PARNASO. MADRID, 1614                           44

TITLE PAGE. EIGHT COMEDIES, ETC. MADRID, 1615                         46

TITLE PAGE. DON QUIXOTE, SECOND PART. MADRID, 1615                    48

TITLE PAGE. PERSILES Y SIGISMUNDA. MADRID, 1617                       50

TITLE PAGE. DON QUIXOTE, SECOND PART. PARIS, 1618                     52

TITLE PAGE. DON QUIXOTE. BRUSSELS, 1662                               54

TITLE PAGE. DON QUIXOTE, FIRST PART. LONDON, 1612                     56

DON QUIXOTE AND SANCHO PANZA (OLDEST PLATE). PARIS,
1622. _First Edition_                                                 60

FIGHT BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND THE BISCAYAN. PARIS,
1713. _Fifth Edition_                                                 62

DON QUIXOTE DISCOURSING ON THE GOLDEN AGE. LONDON,
1738. _Seventh Edition_                                               66

DON QUIXOTE TILTING AGAINST THE ARMY OF ALIFANFARON.
EL HAYA, 1746. _Ninth Edition_                                        70

SANCHO PANZA TOSSED IN THE BLANKET. BOSTON, 1837.
_Thirty-Eighth Edition_                                               72

ADVENTURE WITH THE LIONS. PARIS, 1844. _Fortieth Edition_             74

DON QUIXOTE ABSORBED IN THE READING OF BOOKS ON
KNIGHT ERRANTRY. PARIS, 1845. _Forty-First Edition_                   76

SANCHO’S DILIGENCE IN ENCHANTING DULCINEA. LONDON,
1858. _Forty-Seventh Edition_                                         78

DON QUIXOTE BECOMING AWARE OF THE CURDS IN HIS
HELMET. COPENHAGEN, 1865-1869. _Fifty-Fourth
Edition_                                                              80

WHAT PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS SQUIRE.
MADRID, 1868. _Fifty-Eighth Edition_                                  82

DON QUIXOTE AND SANCHO ON THE ROAD TO TOBOSO.
PARIS, 1868. _Fifty-Ninth Edition_                                    84

DEATH OF DON QUIXOTE. PARIS, 1858. _Sixtieth Edition_                 86




THE LIFE OF MIGUEL DE CERVANTES.


Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra occupies an isolated and unique position
among the great ones of Spanish history. As Columbus stands for the
genius of discovery, Cervantes, in the mind of the civilised world, is
analogous with Spanish literature. Mendoza and Lope de Vega, Tirso de
Molina or Calderon are but shadows beside the reality of Cervantes as a
living force in letters. The record of Spain’s military glory is gemmed
with a cluster of such names as those of the Cid and the Duke of Parma,
of Boabdil, and Spinola; its sea fame rests upon the records of a long
roll of mighty admirals. In art, Velasquez shares precedence with
Murillo, and Ribera and Goya are worthy of a place in the same gallery;
and while in song there is no national composer to associate Spain with
the music of Europe, in the literary firmament the star of Cervantes
rises in single splendour, and obscures all lesser luminaries.

Viewed in another and more personal light, Cervantes is still found to
be “without like or similar;” in himself, as in his work, he retains
his peculiar solitariness. He may not rank equal with Shakespeare and
Homer, Dante and Milton, Balzac and Molière, among the giants of
literature; but as soldier and author he has a double claim upon the
admiration and regard of posterity. Edmund Spencer and Walter Raleigh
sustained the dual rôle with distinction; but the one is now only known
for his poetry, and the other lives only by virtue of his military
exploits. If Cervantes had not written _Don Quixote_, his literary worth
would never have been recognised; but his name would yet have been
preserved to us as “the man of Lepanto” and the captive of Algiers. That
he survived his wounds and captivity, his poverty and persecution, to
publish in his fifty-ninth year a work which Dr. Johnson esteemed the
greatest book in the world after the Iliad, is not less remarkable than
the fact that his whole career, with all his varied and unrelieved
vicissitudes, was necessary for its composition.

Under Philip II., Spain was at the zenith of her glory, and her
hardly-won and short-lived supremacy was already on the wane. At a time
when Spain was a nest of singing birds, the youthful Cervantes won his
spurs as a poet--Navarrete regards him as among “the most celebrated
poets of the nation”--and in an era when valour was the profession of
the nation, he was esteemed one of the most valorous soldiers of his
day. Subsequently he became “probably the first man of genius since the
revival of learning who made an attempt to earn a livelihood by his
pen,” and his enterprise was rewarded with penury and imprisonment. The
character of the man, whom we have learnt to revere as an unappreciated
genius, an unhonoured soldier, and an unrecognised martyr for the
Christian faith, has been finely summed up for us by his Spanish
biographer, Aribau, in the following vivid passage: “Fearless in peril,
strong in adversity, modest in triumph, careless and generous in his own
concerns, delighting in conferring favours, indulgent to the well-meant
efforts of mediocrity, endowed with a sound and very clear judgment, of
an imagination without example in its fecundity--he passed through the
world as a stranger whose language was not understood. His
contemporaries knew him not, but regarded him with indifference.
Posterity has given him but tardy compensation. It has recognised him as
a man who went before his age, who divined the tastes and tendencies of
another society; and, making himself popular with his inexhaustible
graces, announced the dawn of a civilisation which broke long
afterwards.”

Miguel de Cervantes came of a good, if not noble family, which traced
its origin back to the tenth century. Poverty, as he himself has said,
may cloud, but cannot wholly obscure nobility; and although his parents
appear to have possessed an indifferent share of this world’s goods,
they ranked among the hidalgos of Alcala de Henares, in New Castile,
where Miguel was born, in 1547. To-day Alcala is a dull, featureless
little town, decaying by the sleepy waters of the Henares, memorable
only by reason of the mighty names which are associated with its
history. Here Charles V. entertained his royal prisoner Francis I.; here
Francisco Ximenes de Cisneros, in 1510, founded its university; and, in
1517, superintended the printing of the Complutensian Bible, which was
produced at a cost of 80,000 ducats; and here the body of the great
Cardinal Statesman lies beneath a princely monument in the Colégio
Mayor.

From 1616 until 1748 the identity of Cervantes’ birthplace was lost. The
place of Don Quixote’s nativity, it will be remembered, was obscured by
his inventor, in order that “all the towns and villages of La Mancha
might contend among themselves for the honour of giving him birth and
adopting him for their own, as the Seven Cities of Greece contended for
Homer,” and for over 130 years he was himself the subject of a similar
uncertainty. Until 1748, when the discovery of his baptismal registrar
in the Parish Church of Saint Mary the Creator, at Alcala de Henares,
made an end of the mystery that had existed on the point, seven cities
of Spain contended fiercely for the honour of claiming Cervantes for
their own. But the pretentions of Madrid, Seville, Toledo, Lucena,
Esquívias, Alcazar de San Juan and Consuegra were disposed of by this
documentary evidence, and speculation was shifted from Cervantes’
birthplace to his place of education; indeed the little that is known of
the author’s

[Illustration: PORTRAIT OF THE FIGURE IN PACHECO’S PICTURE AT SEVILLE,
SUPPOSED TO REPRESENT CERVANTES.]

early days leaves ample scope for conjecture. Tradition says that he
spent two years at the University of Salamanca, and the house in which
he is supposed to have resided, in the Calle de Moros, is still regarded
as one of the lions of this once famous seat of learning. The city is
now without learning, society, or commerce--a ruin of its former
greatness. Yet in the fourteenth century its university boasted 10,000
students, and in Cervantes’ youth some 5,000 students resorted thither.
But the University of Alcala was also at that time a famous centre of
learning, and it is unlikely that Cervantes, having regard to the
financial status of his family, would go further afield for his
collegiate course. Mr. Fitzmaurice-Kelly, who does not believe that he
was a student of any university, regards the assumption that he was sent
to the distant University of Salamanca, as something like mockery.

All that we can ascertain, concerning his student life, is that he
learnt grammar and the humanities under Lopez de Hoyos, a man of culture
and a teacher of some distinction in his age and generation. In 1568,
upon the death of Isabel de Valois, the third wife of Philip II.,
Cervantes, among Hoyos’ pupils, won much commendation for some verses
written in commemoration of the national bereavement, and we find his
master alluding to the youthful poet as his “dear and beloved pupil,”
and eulogising the “elegant style,” “rhetorical colours,” and “delicate
conceits” of his literary exercises. These compositions, together with
many other early poetical effusions of the author, are to be found in
some Spanish editions of Cervantes’ works, but the general reader will
be content to take them as read. Their author, in his reference to these
immature effusions in his _Journey around Parnassus_, admits that “from
his tenderest years he had loved the sweet art of poesy,” he volunteers
the information that he had produced an endless variety of ballads and
sonnets of varying degrees of merit, and modestly confesses that “Heaven
had not granted him the poet’s grace.”

Cervantes was still a stripling when he first evinced that interest in
the acted drama, which he never entirely lost. Lope de Rueda, who did so
much to produce order out of chaos in the drama of Spain, was at that
time an actor-manager at the head of his own company of strolling
players. It was this gold-beater of Seville, “admirable in Pastoral
Poetry,” distinguished alike “for his acting and for his intelligence,”
who brought comedies “out of their swaddling clothes and gave them
habitation, and attired them decently and handsomely.” Cervantes must
have attended the performances of the Rueda Company when they were in
the neighbourhood of Segovia, in 1558; and in the preface to his volume
of Comedies and Farces, published a year before his death, he gives us
some interesting particulars of the theatrical impedimenta in use at
that time. The performances were given in the morning and afternoon in
the public square, and the only decoration of the theatre was “an old
blanket drawn aside by two ropes, which made what they call the
green-room; behind which were the musicians, singing some old ballad
without a guitar.” The properties consisted of “four benches arranged in
a square, with five or six planks on top of them, raised but four
handsbreadth from the ground;” while the whole apparatus of a manager of
plays, was contained in a sack, and consisted of “four white sheep-skin
dresses, trimmed with gilt leather, and four beards, wigs, and crooks,
more or less.”

In 1568, an event occurred which altered the trend of Cervantes’ life,
and carried him for a period of twelve years from his native land. In
that year, the young and cultured Cardinal Acquaviva came to the Court
of Philip II. on a ceremonial mission from the Pope. Though received
with scant courtesy by the King, the learned envoy was warmly welcomed
by the men of letters of Madrid. By one of these, it is suggested by
Cardinal Espinosa to whom Cervantes had dedicated some of his verses,
the poet was presented to Acquaviva; and when the Papal legate brought
his visit to an end, Cervantes returned with him to Rome in the capacity
of _camarero_, or page. Mr. Kelly treats at some length, if with scant
credulity, the vague legend, that in his early youth Cervantes held some
minor post at Court; and while he attaches no importance to the
traditions that he left Spain to escape the consequences of having
wounded a courtier in a duel, or of having had some love passages with
a lady about the Court, he takes it for granted that he “fled to Italy
in half-voluntary, half-compulsory exile.” Whether that was so or not,
he only remained for little more than a year in the service of his
ecclesiastical patron, and in the beginning of 1570 he entered the
Spanish Army as a private soldier in the company of the famous captain,
Don Diego de Urbina.

While it is generally recognised that Cervantes, the author and
philosopher, was in advance of his age, Cervantes, the man, was, it
would appear, the natural product of his generation and his environment.
In the university city of Alcala, “in that fruitful harvest-time of
Spanish literature,” he cultivated the muses; in Italy--which, at that
period, was dominated by Spain--surrounded, as he was, on all sides by
the indomitable Spanish infantry, who “made the earth tremble with their
firelocks,” the spirit of Cervantes was fired with military ardour.
Christendom, too, was at perpetual war with the Turks, and to a youth of
Cervantes’ chivalrous temperament the prospects offered by a career
which united the services of both Church and King would prove
irresistible. He was present, in 1570, at the ineffectual attempt to
relieve the Island of Cyprus, a failure which led up to the formation of
the Holy League of Spain, Venice, and Rome against Selim II., and found
its crowning glory in the Battle of Lepanto.

The troops went into Winter quarters on their return from Cyprus, and
Cervantes trod the streets

[Illustration: CERVANTES.]

of Naples for more than a year, while the allied fleets were being
mobilised. On September 15th, Don Juan of Austria found himself in
command of the squadron of 208 galleys, 7 galleons, and 24 sailing
ships, which sailed from Messina with a complement of 26,000 soldiers to
give battle to the Turkish fleet. The enemy were discovered within the
Gulf of Lepanto, where, on October 7th, was fought one of the greatest
sea-actions of all times. The Turkish ships, though more numerous than
those of the allies, were smaller in design, inferior in their
armaments, and less skilfully navigated, while the wind, veering
suddenly at the crisis of the struggle, gave the advantage to the united
fleet. Though the result was not the beginning of the end of Moslem
supremacy, the victory of the Holy League was complete and emphatic. The
power of the Turk was arrested, and all Christendom rang with the glory
of the achievement.

The story of the Battle of Lepanto does not call for special description
in these pages; its personal and peculiar interest for us lies in the
fact that the two names that are associated with the victory in the most
notable prominence are those of Don Juan of Austria, the generalissimo
of the forces, and Miguel de Cervantes, the private soldier on the
_Marquesa_--the one for his skill and generalship, the other for his
personal heroism. Of Cervantes’ share in the battle, we have ample and
detailed evidence. On the morning of the action he was, according to
Martin Fernández de Navarrete, stricken with fever, and ordered to
remain in the safety of his cabin. But on the representations of the
young soldier, who protested that he would rather die fighting for God
and his King than tend his health in security, his captain gave him a
command of twelve men, and stationed him in a boat on the fighting side
of the galley. Opposed to the _Marquesa_ was the flagship of the Turkish
right squadron, commanded by the Captain-Pasha of Alexandria, and
floating the royal standard of Egypt. The duel between the two galleys
was fought with the utmost gallantry on both sides, but the Turk was
captured after the loss of 500 of her crew, and her surrender involved
the rout of the entire right squadron.

That Cervantes’ share in this encounter was of material service in
contributing to its successful issue, is evidenced by the fact that in
an army of 26,000 soldiers and sailors he won the most distinguished
measure of individual renown. That he held the post of greatest danger,
that he was the first to board the galley, and bore himself with
intrepid gallantry, we know on the sworn testimony of Mateo de
Santisteban and others of his comrades. The evidence is supported by the
unusual interest and concern that Don Juan evinced in him, raising his
pay by five or six _escudos_, and visiting him in the Hospital of
Messina. For Cervantes had not come through the battle unscathed. In his
breast he received two arquebus wounds, while his left hand was injured
by a ball, which rendered it useless for the remainder of his life. In
Sola’s bronze statue of Cervantes, at Barcelona, “El manco de Lepanto,”
as his countrymen have proudly styled him, is represented with his
maimed hand hidden beneath his cloak; although, during his lifetime, he
carried with pride the wounds received in “the most memorable of all
occasions past, present, or to come”--“wounds that show like stars,
lighting us on to heaven and to fame”--and declared that his useless
left hand was crippled “for the greater glory of the right.”

Between 1571 and 1575 Cervantes lived the strenuous life of a private
soldier, taking part in two campaigns, fighting with enthusiasm,
enduring wounds and hardships with stoical fortitude, and acquiring that
knowledge of men and things which he was afterwards to employ to such
good purpose. His injuries were tended at Messina, but he returned to
his duties before they were properly healed; and two years later, when
he went to Tunis in the army of Don Juan, he writes to Mateo Vasquez
that his wounds were “yet dripping with blood.” After his discharge from
the hospital, he was transferred to the _tercio de Figueroa_, commanded
by Don Manuel Ponce de Leon; and, as a _soldado aventajado_, or select
soldier, in the most famous infantry regiment of Spain, he was on the
high road to promotion and a distinguished career. In the story of “The
Captive,” in _Don Quixote_ (Part I., Chapter xxxix.), Cervantes has left
us a graphic account of the ineffective and inglorious second campaign
of the allies in the Levant, which was followed by the dissolution of
the Holy League. Cervantes repaired with his regiment to Naples, and,
after the Tunis expedition, he was for some time in garrison in the
Island of Sardinia, before being sent to Genoa by the order of Don Juan.

The inadequacy of the Spanish garrison left for the protection of Tunis,
and the growing boldness and activity of the combined Moors and Turks,
called for prompt measures; and, in 1574, Don Juan held himself in
readiness with a fleet to restore Spanish prestige in Africa. But the
delays, caused by the procrastination of Philip, proved fatal. Before
the squadron received the supplies and materials required for the
expedition, the allies, after a desperate military and naval engagement,
captured the Goletta, and obtained possession of Tunis. With this last
prospect of active service dispelled, Cervantes, weary of inaction,
disgusted with the unchivalrous termination of the Crusade which had
commenced so gloriously at Lepanto, and eager for the sight of his
native land, obtained leave to return to Spain. The high opinion in
which he was held by “men of state and of might” with whom he had come
in contact, is shown by the fact that this private soldier received from
the Commander-in-Chief, Don Juan, a letter to the King, strongly
recommending him as “a man of valour, of merit, and of many signal
services,” while the Viceroy of Sicily, the Duke of Sessa, provided him
with letters to Philip, and to his Council, in

[Illustration: CERVANTES.]

which he speaks of him as “a soldier as deserving as he was unfortunate;
who, by his noble virtue and gentle disposition, had won the esteem of
his comrades and his chiefs.” In August, 1575, he set sail for Naples on
board the galley _El Sol_, but five years more were to elapse before he
was again to tread the shores of Spain.

In the following month, _El Sol_ was attacked within sight of the
Spanish coast by a squadron of Algerine pirates. In the unequal contest
which followed, Cervantes is reported to have borne himself with
characteristic gallantry, but such an encounter could have but one
issue, and the captured Spaniards were divided up among the Moors as
spoils of victory. Cervantes became the prize of a Captain, named Delí
Mamí, a renegade Greek, who had earned the distinction of being one of
the most ferocious of that notoriously savage and revengeful race of
corsairs. For the following five years Cervantes endured a tyranny of
serfdom as rigorous and unrelaxing as ever slave suffered in the mines
of Spain. He was already known as _el manco de Lepanto_; he was now to
earn, if not to wear, the title of _el manco de Argel_.

It is not our purpose here to give a detailed description of the
sufferings he bore with knightly fortitude and undaunted spirit for
those long five years. The particulars are preserved to us in official
documents, but a brief summary must find a place in our sketch.

According to the testimony of Father Haedo, in whose _Topography of
Algiers_, published in 1612, we have the most valuable authority for
this period of Cervantes’ life, and who was an eye-witness to the
cruelties practised upon the Christian slaves, the captivity of
Cervantes was one of the hardest ever known in Algiers. Mr. Watts has
given us an eloquent account of our hero in this bondage. It was borne,
he says, with a courage and constancy which, had there been nothing else
to make his name memorable, must have sufficed to rank Cervantes among
the heroes of his age and country. No episode more romantic is contained
in the books of chivalry. No adventures more strange were encountered by
any knight-errant. Not Amadis nor Esplandian, nor any of those whose
fabled deeds had kindled his youthful imagination, displayed a loftier
spirit of honour, or more worthily discharged his knightly devoir, than
did Miguel de Cervantes when in duress in Algiers. A slave in the power
of the bitter enemy of his creed and nation, cut off in the heyday of
his fame from the path of ambition which fortune seemed to have opened
to him; no lot could be more cruel than that which, in the fulness of
his manhood and genius, fell to his share.

Nor is there any chapter of his life more honourable than that record of
the singular daring, fortitude, patience and cheerfulness with which he
bore his fate during this miserable period. With no other support than
his own indomitable spirit, forgotten by those whom he had served,
unable to receive any help from his friends, subjected to every kind of
hardship which the tyranny or caprice of his masters might order,
pursued by an unrelenting evil destiny, which seemed in this, as in
every other passage of his career, to mock at his efforts to live that
high heroic life which he had conceived to himself; this poor maimed
soldier was looked up to by that wretched colony of Christian captives
(including among them many men of higher birth and rank) as their chief
counsellor, comforter, and guide. In his formal information, laid before
the commissary of the Spanish Government at Algiers, Father Juan Gil, of
the Order of the Redemptorists, very particular testimony is borne by
Cervantes’ fellow-captives to his character and conduct, as one who bore
himself always as a faithful Christian, who cheered those who were
despondent, who shared with the poor the little that he possessed, who
helped the sick in their necessities, who risked every danger in the
cause of the faith, behaving himself always like a true soldier of the
King and a noble gentleman--all of which good record is confirmed by the
honest Father himself of his own personal knowledge.

The daring escapes that Cervantes planned, the intrepid courage with
which he set himself to invent new schemes when the old ones miscarried;
the indomitable cheerfulness he always maintained, and especially the
spell he exercised over his master, the brutal Hassan Pasha of evil
memory, are sufficient to mark him as a man of extraordinary resource,
magnetism, and force of character. Delí Mamí, misled by the letters
which were found upon the person of his captive, regarded Cervantes as a
man of position and substance, and the treatment meted out to him was
the more severe, in order that his family would the more speedily effect
his release. These Algerine pirates lived upon the ransoms which they
extorted from the friends of their captives; and at the time of
Cervantes’ bondage, no fewer than 25,000 Christians, including many men
of rank and fortune, were waiting the arrival of the price of their
freedom, and frequently enlivening the monotony of their servitude by
attempting to escape. Cervantes earned a peculiar celebrity among this
army of captives by the ingenuity and persistence of the plans he put
into practice in order to achieve the ambition of every bondman. But
while his courage became proverbial, and his craft amazed both his
captors and his fellow-prisoners, his ill-luck ever intervened to
frustrate his best-laid plans.

A further reference may be permitted here to the influence which
Cervantes exercised upon his barbarous gaoler, Hassan Pasha, who had
purchased him from Delí Mamí for the sum of 500 gold crowns. The author
of _Don Quixote_ has told us (Part I., Chapter xi.) of “the unheard-of
and unseen cruelties which my master practised on the Christians. Every
day he hanged a slave; impaled one; cut off the ears of another; and
this upon so

[Illustration: PORTRAIT OF CERVANTES, MODELLED BY ROSENDO NOBAS, UNDER
THE DIRECTION OF DON LEOPOLD RIUS.]

little occasion, or so entirely without cause, that the Turks would own
he did it merely for the sake of doing it, and because it was his
nature.” This “homicide of all human kind,” as Cervantes stigmatises him
in another place, was so inexplicably dominated by fear and respect of
his slave that he was wont to declare that, “if he had this maimed
Spaniard in safe keeping, he would reckon as secure his Christians, his
ships, and his city.” But the most difficult feat of his
governorship--Hassan Pasha was at this period Viceroy and virtual King
of Algeria--was to retain his intrepid prisoner in custody. Twice the
hangman’s rope was drawn upon his neck, and twice his head was, at the
last moment, taken from the noose. On one occasion he was ordered 2,000
blows with a stick by “the most cruel tyrant of all those who have been
kings of Algiers,” but the rod never descended upon his body. Yet it is
known that he did not volunteer one word on his own behalf, or urge a
single plea in extenuation of his designs. When the viceroy’s soldiers
captured a little band of Christians, on the eve of their embarkation on
a frigate sent to their relief, it was Miguel de Cervantes who went
forward alone to meet the captors, declaring that he alone was the
instigator of the whole plot, and that none of his companions had any
part or blame in the business. He repeated his statement in the presence
of Hassan Pasha, and although “threatened with torture and instant
death, with the spectacle of many of his companions hanged or mutilated
before his eyes, Cervantes refused to implicate any one in his schemes
of flight.”

In 1577, Cervantes, recognising the unpreparedness of the Algerians, the
weakness of the city’s fortifications, and the numerical superiority of
the Christian population to support from within a systematic scheme to
capture the city, made an ineffectual appeal to the king to come to the
rescue of his captive subjects. The petition, if ever it came to Philip,
fell upon deaf ears; and the arch-plotter, disappointed but undeterred,
sent a secret message to Don Martin de Cordova, the Governor of Oran,
praying him to provide men to assist in a general escape. The
miscarriage of this adventure, through the capture and death of the
messenger, brought Cervantes once more within an ace of the rod and the
halter, but the irrepressible schemer was presently surprised in
hatching still another device to obtain his liberty, and had to seek
refuge with a friend from the rage of the viceroy. A proclamation,
threatening instant death to anyone sheltering the fugitive, was
published in Algiers, and rather than expose his concealer to this
danger, Cervantes voluntarily presented himself before Hassan Pasha, who
vainly endeavoured, by threats of torture and death, to extort from him
the names of his accomplices.

Loaded with chains, and guarded with unceasing vigilance, he was now
kept for five months in the closest confinement, but the viceroy still
refrained from visiting the defiance of his prisoner with stripes or
personal indignity. As Cervantes has recorded, in his modest reference
to this period of captivity in _Don Quixote_: “The only one who held his
own with him (Hassan Pasha) was a Spanish soldier, called De Saavedra,
to whom, though he did things which will dwell in the memory of those
people for many years, and all for the recovery of his freedom, his
master never gave him a blow, nor bade anyone to do so, nor even spoke
to him an ill word, though for the least of the many things he did we
all feared he would be impaled, as he himself feared more than once.”
This story is confirmed by Father Haedo, who says that while the
captivity of Cervantes was “one of the worst ever known in Algiers,” he
was never beaten, or hurt, or abused in his person; and the worthy
Benedictine monk, in his _Topografia e Historia General de Argel_
(1612), further declares that “had his (Cervantes’) fortune corresponded
to his intrepidity, his industry, and his projects, this day Algiers
would belong to the Christians; for to no other end did his intents
aspire.”

While we must deplore the wounds which Cervantes received in the wars,
and sorrow over the duress he suffered in Algiers, it must be always
remembered with pride that it was to his personal valour, and nobility
in adversity, that we owe the full and particular account that we have
of these years of his career. As he gained the commendation of Don Juan
in action, he won in adversity “great fame, praise, honour, and glory
among the Christians” in Algiers. And that the record of his unswerving
loyalty to creed and country, his “mingled genius and greatness,” and
his magnanimous refusal to inculpate anyone in his many attempts to
escape, should not be lost, a base Dominican, one Blanco de Paz,
circulated such calumnies against Cervantes that he demanded the charges
should be investigated before Father Juan Gil. Cervantes had, at this
time, been ransomed by the efforts of his family and the generosity of
the local merchants, who supplemented the 600 ducats his mother and
sister had managed to raise by a contribution of a further 400 ducats,
with which Hassan Pasha was satisfied. The inquiry lasted for twelve
days, and ended in the complete acquittal of Cervantes, who was declared
to be deserving, for his conduct in captivity, of all the praises which
he had received. The abstract of these proceedings, signed by Father
Juan Gil, are still reserved in the archives of Simancas, and from these
we obtain the materials for the biographical account of Cervantes’
career during his Algerine captivity. “Had there survived no other
record than this of the life of Cervantes,” Mr. Watts justly remarks,
“had he not written a line of the books which have made him famous, the
proofs we have here of his greatness of soul, constancy, and
cheerfulness under the severest of trials which a man could endure,
would be sufficient to ensure him lasting fame. The enthusiasm, the
alacrity, and

[Illustration: MIGUEL DE CERVANTES SAAVEDRA.]

the unanimity with which all the witnesses--including the captives of
the highest rank and character in Algiers--give their testimony in
favour of their beloved comrade, are quite remarkable, and without
precedent. They speak of him in terms such as no knight of romance ever
deserved; of his courage in danger; his resolution under suffering; his
patience in trouble; his daring and fertility of resource in action. He
seems to have won the hearts of all the captives, both laymen and
clerics, by his good humour, unselfish devotion, and kindliness of
heart.” His liberation was effected on the 19th September, 1580; the
inquiry held by Father Gil was concluded on the 22nd October; and in the
last days of the same year he landed in Spain, and learned from
experience the truth of his confident declaration: “There is not a
satisfaction on earth equal to that of recovered liberty.”

Mr. Fitzmaurice-Kelly, whose study of Cervantes’ life and character is
instinct with a wholesome sanity and a freedom from all sentimental
adulation, does not fail to detect the extravagant sanguineness which
inspired many of these attempts at escape. To him, “the whole story of
this captivity reads like a page from some wild impossible romance;” but
while his judicious biographer can smile at Cervantes’ “sublime
self-confidence,” and regard his _affairé_ with the unknown Portuguese
lady without hysteria, and is not even convinced that Christendom was
saved on the great day of Lepanto, by the single arm of our hero, he is
not lacking in sincere appreciation of the many virtues of the author of
_Don Quixote_. Cervantes was not a great poet, or a great dramatist, or
a great man of business; viewed in the light of the age in which he
lived, and Mr. Kelly never fails to bear this fundamental condition in
mind, he was an honourable, right-living man, who made no pretentions to
being an ascetic or a saint. Mr. Kelly can detect the minor blemishes of
a nature which had the defects of its own virtues; he realises that his
frequent and fruitless dashes for liberty, which only intensified the
severity of his captivity, were inspired by a reckless, uncalculating
optimism; but he is not blind to the sympathetic, generous spirit which
not even malignant oppression could imbitter, or to the buoyant
temperament which the sternest fates could not deaden.

“To say that when Cervantes left his home of servitude,” Mr. Kelly
writes, “he was in every respect the same man as when he entered it,
would be to say that he was deaf to the voice of wisdom, and blind to
the disillusioning teaching of experience. He had had borne in on him
‘the sense that every struggle brings defeat,’ and had realised the
width and depth of the vast abyss which yawns between the easy project
and the painful, nebulous, far-off achievement. Something of the
invincible confidence, the early ardour, the unquestioning trustfulness
of youth had passed with the passing years, and melted into the grey,
sombre ether of the past; but nothing misanthropic mingled with his
splendid scorn, his magnificent disdain for the base and the ignoble;
nothing of the cruel, fierce indignation of Swift gleamed from those
quiet, searching eyes, which watched the absurdities of his fellow-men
with a humorous, whimsical, indulgent smile. In the squalid prison life
his strenuous courage, his iron constancy and self-sacrificing devotion
had drawn every heart towards him with one exception--that of the
scandalous, shameless friar, Blanco de Paz.”

After seven years of intermittant activity, and yet another five of
terrible captivity, in the service of Spain, we find Cervantes, at the
age of thirty-three, the “captain of his fate,” but attached to no
regiment; the “master of his soul,” but master of nothing else. He
carried his honourable wounds and the traces of his duress with pride,
but so far as worldly advancement went, they did not serve him. He might
well have cried, in the spirit and words of W. E. Henley:

    “Under the bludgeonings of chance
     My head is bloody but unbowed;”

but the king, for whom he had shed his blood, was unmindful of him; his
patron, Don Juan of Austria, was dead, and he had perforce to commence
the business of life over again, without a friend and with a financial
liability in the matter of his ransom, which was to take him four years
to pay off. But he would appear to have been without regrets or
repinings--he had regained his liberty, and we know in what measure he
prized it. He must have been re-living the emotions he experienced on
his return to his native land, when he made Don Quixote declare to his
faithful squire: “Liberty ... is one of the most valuable blessings that
heaven has bestowed upon mankind. Not all the treasures concealed in the
bowels of the earth, nor those in the bosom of the sea can be compared
with it. For liberty a man may--nay, ought--to hazard even his life, as
well as for honour, accounting captivity the greatest misery he can
endure.”

History tells us that even in the comparatively brief period of
Cervantes’ captivity the decline of the mighty Empire of Spain had
commenced. The inherent meanness of Philip’s spirit, his religious
intolerance, his incompetence as both statesman and soldier, and the
dominant power of the priests, had sapped the nation’s energy, and
crushed national ambition. The character of the king set the seal on the
country’s destiny. He abhorred letters, and was jealous of intellectual
eminence; he was feeble and timorous in his foreign policy, and starved
the soldiers upon whom the burden of maintaining the Empire rested; his
one love and ambition was for the Church, which was sapping the life
blood of the nation. Of the 50,000,000 people who constituted the
population of his dominions, no fewer than a million persons were in the
service of the Church. There were archbishops by the score, bishops by
the

[Illustration]

hundred, and lesser ecclesiastes by the hundreds of thousands. The Holy
Office alone offered a sure road to advancement and position, and many
there were that walked therein.

But Cervantes, undashed by ingratitude and undaunted by hardship,
retained his loyalty, and relinquished not a tittle of his chivalrous
conceptions and aspirations. He was still desperately sincere in the
convictions, which never left him, that “there is nothing in the world
more commendable than to serve God in the first place, and the King in
the next, especially in the profession of arms, which, if it does not
procure a man so much riches as learning, may at least entitle him to
more honour.” As the profession of arms had won him no honour, so he was
to learn by experience that learning would deny him riches; but the
knowledge that he had deserved the one, and had been instrumental in the
accumulation, if not in the participation, of the other, may have
afforded him some slight comfort. That he revelled in the desperate
chances, as well as in the prospect of winning honour, which the
soldiers’ life had to give, may be gathered from the exhortation which
he makes _Don Quixote_ give to the young soldier: “I would not have you
be uneasy with thoughts of what misfortunes may befall you; the worst
can be but to die, and if it be a good, honourable death your fortune is
made, and you are certainly happy.... For suppose you should be cut off
at the very first engagement by a canon ball, or the springing of a
mine, what matters it? it is but dying, and there is an end of the
business.”

We may be sure that some such reflections filled the mind of Miguel de
Cervantes when he rejoined his old regiment, now known, from its
exploits in the Low Countries, as the _tercio de Flandes_, and marched
under his old commander, Lope de Figueroa, to the subjugation of
Portugal. He was serving God in the first place, and his King in the
next, believing that at the worst he would find fortune and happiness in
“a good, honourable death.” His lifetime rival and disparager, “that
prodigy of Nature,” Lope de Vega, has told us that he carried a musket
in the same campaign; but it is unlikely that he was animated by the
same honourable philosophy.

The conquest of Portugal was a simple undertaking, the land forces of
Don Antonio making but a feeble show of resistance; but with the aid of
France, the illegitimate son of Luis, the brother of Joam III., made a
more formidable opponent on the seas. His fleet, which had its base in
the Azores, was joined by some sixty French ships, under Philippo
Strozzi, and six English privateers, and this flotilla gave battle to
the Spanish squadron, commanded by the Marquess of Santa Cruz, off
Terceira, in the Summer of 1582. Cervantes was serving on the flagship
_San Mateo_, which was opposed to three of the enemy’s vessels, and
again our hero failed to obtain advancement, or achieve a good,
honourable death. The engagement ended in a signal victory for the
Spaniards, but it benefited Cervantes not at all, and he left his
regiment (probably in the late Autumn of 1582) as poor and unfavoured as
he had rejoined it. Many years afterwards, in May, 1590, in his petition
addressed to Philip II., praying for one of the offices then vacant in
America, as a compensation for his sufferings, and in acknowledgment of
his services on behalf of the King, he recapitulates his engagements at
Lepanto and Tunis, alludes to his period of captivity, and refers to his
campaign “in the Kingdom of Portugal and in the Terceiras with the
Marquess of Santa Cruz.”

This Portuguese campaign is interesting, so far as Cervantes is
concerned, as recording the only instance of a liason that is known in
his career. Most of his biographers have either glossed over the fact,
or declined to believe it, but it is a matter that calls for neither
apology nor incredulity. We know that he entertained a very favourable
opinion of the Portuguese, and was loud in his appreciation of the
beauty and amiability of the Portuguese ladies. The identity of the
fair, frail one who won his good will is wrapped in mystery; but the
memory of this _affaire_ must have been with him when he wrote, nearly a
quarter of a century later, “the passion of love is to be vanquished by
flight alone, and that we must not pretend to grapple with so powerful
an adversary since, though the force be human, Divine succours are
necessary to subdue it.” The fruit of this amour was a daughter, called
Doña Isabel de Saavedra, who became his life companion, and who, after
his death, entered the convent of the barefooted Trinitarian nuns at
Madrid.

All sorts of conjectures as to the identity of the lady have been made;
but, as Mr. Kelly, with his characteristic common-sense declares,
“nothing whatever is known of her; nothing at this day is likely to be
discovered about her; and the whole question might be passed over were
it not for the _curiosos impertinentes_, the literary ghouls who
manifest their interest in high literature by leaving _Don Quixote_
unread, and striving to discover the name of Cervantes’ mistress.”

But Mr. Kelly, in this part, as in one or two other instances in his
scholarly _Life of Cervantes_, is inclined to claim less for his hero
than he is entitled to. He says here that, “so far as Cervantes himself
is concerned in this matter, his biographer must be content to admit
that his subject was no saint, but an impetuous man of genius, with
quite as full a share of frailty as though he had been a peer.” Yet a
study of the career of Cervantes discloses him, if not a saint, at least
a man of less frailty than the majority of the world’s great ones; and
to suppose him habitually frail because one indiscretion can be
attributed to him, seems scarcely generous. Again, in dealing with that
period of Cervantes’ life in Valladolid, after the publication of _Don
Quixote_, Mr. Kelly says, “He probably had a little money at this time,
and, though it would seem that he spent some of it in very undesirable
ways, it may be hoped that

[Illustration: STATUE OF CERVANTES AT MADRID.]

the woman of the family no longer needed to take in the sewing from the
Marques de Villafranca”; and, in another place, he refers to the
“supererogatory folly” which misled him in Valladolid. He bases this
supposition on the evidence on a MS., entitled, _Memorias de
Valladolid_, now in the British Museum, in which the name of Cervantes
is put into the mouth of a woman in a gambling house. As the author was
not the only bearer of the name of Cervantes in Spain in that day, and
as none of his candid friends refer to his vices or immoralities, either
in prose or verse, one might, I think, regard this piece of evidence
with more than usual suspicion. Mr. Watts dismisses the charge as
unworthy of any credence, and most Cervantists will, doubtless, treat
the imputation in the same fashion.

Between his retirement from the Army and the publication of the first,
and only published part, of the _Galatea_, Cervantes, on the evidence of
his petition to the King, conveyed letters and advices from Mostagan, a
Spanish possession on the Coast of Barbary, to Philip, and was sent by
His Majesty to Oran, where he was employed in affairs of the fleet,
under the orders of Antonio de Guevara. But the nature and duration of
his employment are matters of conjecture, and we must turn to 1584 for
the next authentic details of his career. In that year our author
married a wife, and published the _Galatea_.

The _Galatea_, which was not translated into English until 1867, has
enjoyed less vogue in this country than in France, where Florian’s
translation is still in demand. In Spain, at least half-a-dozen editions
were called for during the lifetime of the author, and so great was the
esteem in which it was held at the time, that gentlemen from France,
affected to letters, had their _Galatea_ by heart. Cervantes’ _Eclogue_,
or, as we should style it, pastoral romance, was not a literary
experiment, being an exercise in the manner of Montemayor’s _Diana_, and
having its inspiration in the fashion of the period. This “firstfruits
of his poor wit,” as the author calls it in his preface, is concerned
with shepherds and shepherdesses, their loves, their longings, and their
lassitudes. The fable is artificial, the language is stilted, the
passion false, and the whole, to modern eyes and ears, is tedious, and
not a little ridiculous. That it appealed to the current fancy in poetry
and fiction is its excuse; that it was at least equal in merit, if not
superior, to any contemporary effort of the same class, is its only
substantial merit. Some personal interest the pastoral has in the
introduction of real persons under romantic names. Cervantes’ own love
story is rehearsed in the prologue, the poet masquerades as Elicio, and
his wife as Galatea, while Tirsi, Timbrio, Damon, and Erasteso are all
friends of the author. Twenty years later Cervantes made merry over this
class of literature, when in _Don Quixote_ he makes the Knight,
returning vanquished from the Tourney at Barcelona, propose to Sancho
Panza that they shall turn shepherds and lead a rural life. He decides
to call himself Quixotis, to re-name his Squire, Pansino and Teresa
Panza is to be celebrated in the annal of arcady by the style of
Teresania. The objects and employment of the shepherds were to consist
of poetry and protestation. “For my part,” the Don declared, “I will
complain of absence, thou” (his Squire) “shall celebrate thy own loyalty
and constancy, the Shepherd Larrascon shall expostulate on his
shepherdess’s disdain, and the Pastor Curiambio choose what subject he
likes best; and so all will be managed to our hearts’ content”--even as
it was managed by Cervantes in the _Galatea_.

Yet, artificial and uninspiriting as the pastoral appears to-day, it was
acclaimed with unstinted praise, both at home and abroad, and caused the
author to be classed by Gálvez de Montalvo and by Pedro de Padilla among
the most famous poets of Castile. It brought him friends; it gave him
enemies; but it was powerless to advance his worldly fortune--the money
derived from the sale of the various editions of the book found their
way into other pockets.

Of the _Galatea_, Cervantes has left us his own critical estimate in
Chapter iv., Part I., of _Don Quixote_. The curate and the barber are
overhauling the Don’s library--“those unconscionable books of
disventures,” the tales of chivalry over which he would pore for
eight-and-forty hours together--and of the hundred large volumes, and a
good number of small ones, only some half-dozen escape the bonfire that
has been built of them in the back yard. The _Galatea_ was one of the
exempt. “That Cervantes has been my intimate acquaintance these many
years,” cried the curate, “and I know he has been more conversant with
misfortunes than with poetry. His book, indeed, has I don’t know what,
that looks like a good design; he aims at something, but concludes
nothing; therefore, we must stay for the second part, which he has
promised us; perhaps he may make us amends, and obtain a full pardon,
which is denied him for the present....”

The _Galatea_, the second part of which was never written, is not lost
to us, though it is little read; but of the rest of the survivors of the
curate’s conflagration, and which Cervantes praises through the lips of
his character--_Amadis de Gaul_, _Palmerin of England_, _Ten Books of
the Fortunes of Love_, by Anthony de Lofraco; _The Shepherd of Filida_,
together with the _Araucana_, of Don Alonso de Ercilla; the _Austirada_,
of Jean Ruffo, a magistrate of Cordova; and the _Monserrato_, of
Christopher de Virves, a Valentian poet--they are now only known because
they are mentioned in _Don Quixote_. Yet of the last three works
Cervantes makes the curate declare: “These are the best heroic poems we
have in Spanish, and may vie with the most celebrated in Italy. Reserve
them as the most valuable performances which Spain has to boast of in
poetry.”

Into the profession of letters Cervantes carried a

[Illustration: LETTER ADDRESSED BY CERVANTES TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF
TOLEDO, DATED MARCH 26TH, 1616.]

principle and a philosophy as commendable and ennobling as the ambition
that had sustained him in the profession of arms. “It is laudable,” he
declared, “for a poet to employ his pen in a virtuous cause,” and he
preached nothing that he did not practise consistently. “Let him direct
the shafts of satire against vice,” he continued, “in all its various
forms, but not level them at individuals; like some who, rather than not
indulge their mischievous wit will hazard a disgraceful banishment to
the Isles of Pontus. If the poet be correct in his morals, his verse
will partake of the same purity; the pen is the tongue of the mind, and
what his conceptions are, such will be his productions.”

And so, with these high ideals in his mind, and but few pieces in his
wallet, he married on 12th December, 1584, with Dona Catalina de
Palacios Salazar y Vozmediano, a young lady of good family, and in
worldly substance the superior of her husband. The tenth of his fortune,
which Cervantes settled upon his wife, amounted to 100 ducats, while an
inventory of the bride’s effects include several plantations of young
vines in the district of Esquívias, a small town of New Castile; six
bushels of meal and one of wheat at eight reals, or 1s. 8d.; some
articles of household furniture; two linen and three cotton sheets, a
cushion and two pillows stuffed with wool; one good blanket, and one
worn; tables, chairs, pots, and pans; a brasier, a grater, several jars,
sacred images, in alabaster and silver gilt; a crucifix, two little
images of the baby Jesus; four beehives, forty-five hens and pullets,
and one cock. The lady who brought these curiously varied articles into
the common stock bore Cervantes no children, survived him over ten
years, and was buried, at her request, at her husband’s side in the
convent of the Trinitarian nuns. And in these few lines, her story, so
far as we know it, is told.

For a few months Cervantes continued to live at Esquívias, and in 1585
we find him removed to Madrid, where his household consisted, in
addition to his wife and his little daughter, Isabel, his widowed
sister, Andrea, and her eight-year-old daughter, Constanza. Letters had
not then become a recognised profession, and in the domain of poetry,
amateurism was a disease. Tinkers, tailors, soldiers, sailors--all
rhymed unceasingly. Lope de Vega, who was of the number, wrote: “In
every street 4,000 poets;” and Cervantes, in his _Voyage around
Parnassus_, refers to “the vulgar squadron of seven-month poets, 20,000
strong, whose being is a mystery.” Lope de Vega, then, as always, more
fortunate than Cervantes, a youth of twenty-three, already famous as a
poet and a libertine, was acting as the confidential secretary of the
young Duke of Alva. His dissolute life, which occasionally brought him
into conflict with the authorities was, on the whole, far more to his
advancement than was the virtuous rectitude of Cervantes, and it is
possible that the jealousy and rancour with which the

[Illustration]

younger dramatist followed his less affluent but more gifted rival was
inspired by the knowledge of his purity in his life and his works. Their
careers for awhile progressed along the same lines, but with Cervantes
always in the van. They were writing innumerable verses at the same
period; but while Lope de Vega, following the custom of the day,
lampooned his colleagues, and levelled foul and venemous sonnets at his
contemporaries, Cervantes steadily set his face against the practice. He
had laid down a rule for his own guidance, from which he never diverged.
He can jest a brother poet and banter the foibles of the writers of his
day with gentle irony and good humour, but he reserves his censure and
his sarcasm for the castigation of evil, vice and folly.

If, as seems more than probable, the relations between Cervantes and
Vega were strained, their differences could have had no origin in the
attitude of the former. It is true that in _Don Quixote_ the literary
artifices and affectations of Lope de Vega are treated with benignant
banter, and the bad taste and vulgarity which he indulged in many of his
plays came in for some severe and judicious criticism, but in the same
place other of his dramas are selected for special praise, and the
dramatist is eulogised as “that most happy genius of these kingdoms, who
has composed such an infinite number of plays with so much glory, with
so much grace, such elegant verse, such choice language, such weighty
sentiments--so rich in eloquence and loftiness of style, as that the
world is filled with his renown.”

In return for this eulogy, and many other flattering references, Lope de
Vega has mentioned Cervantes’ name exactly four times in print, and then
only in cold and restrained terms; and in a letter written to his late
patron, the Duke of Sessa, he disclosed his animus in the following item
of news: “Of poets I speak not. Many are in the bud for next year, but
there are none so bad as Cervantes, or so foolish as to praise _Don
Quixote_.” It was inevitable that a man of the disposition of Vega, whom
his friend, Alarcon, has described as “the universal envier of the
applause given to others,” should have envied the fame and genius of
Cervantes, who, as Mr. Watts has written, was “of a temper the sweetest
among men of genius, who had come through the fiery ordeal of a life of
hardship with a heart unsoured as with honour unblemished.” As poet and
novelist, Cervantes outdistanced the younger writer in public
estimation, and as the author of _Don Quixote_, he soared to a height
which has been unattained by any other Spanish novelist; in the realm of
the drama alone Lope de Vega was paramount.

It has been seen that Cervantes early acquired a taste for theatrical
representations, and at the close of the sixteenth century he doubtless
turned to this style of composition as offering the only available means
of making an income. Between 1585 and 1588 he wrote and produced between
twenty and

[Illustration]

thirty plays, and claimed, on insufficient grounds, to have introduced
several important changes in the material of stage representations. The
trick of introducing allegorical characters among the sublunary
personages, which Cervantes assumes as one of his improvements, was in
practice in the old miracle plays, and his further pretention to having
reduced the number of acts from five to three had been done long before
by Avendano. Indeed it is possible that Cervantes produced no more than
a number of respectable pieces which gained their full mead of
popularity; and we know that his rate of payment, which averaged 800
reals per play, was equal to that received by Vega at any period of his
career. But of his dramas only two have outlived their day--_La
Numancia_ and _El Trato de Argel_.

_La Numancia_, a play dealing with the famous siege of Numantia by the
Romans, was subsequently acted at Zaragoza, in 1808, to inspire the
besieged inhabitants to a last desperate effort, a device which
succeeded so well that the French were driven from the battlements in
the very moment of victory, and the city was saved. _El Trato de Argel_,
in which Cervantes stages episodes in his captivity in Algeria, is a
poorly-constructed, ineffective, and tedious piece of work, which gives
one furiously to think that if the plays of our author won favour, it
could only have been at a time when competition was weak or
non-existent. Matos Fragoso, a dramatist who flourished a century later,
alludes to the “famous comedies of the ingenious Cervantes,” but of
contemporary criticism we have none; and Cervantes, in his prologue to
his _Eight Comedies and Eight Interludes_, published in 1614, claims for
his plays, with characteristic reticence: “They all ran their course
without hisses, cries, or disturbances. They were all repeated without
receiving tribute of cucumbers or any other missiles.” Of the lost _La
Confusa_ (The Perplexed Lady), the dramatist speaks with particular
satisfaction as ranking “good among the best of the comedies of the
Cloak and Sword, which had been, up to that time, acted.” Well, the
Spaniards are a conservative people, and to-day one may witness in that
country, performances of stage plays that are listened to without the
disconcerting accompaniment of the hurtling cucumbers, but which in an
English theatre would be received with all manner of unfriendly
disapprobation.

As a playwright, Mr. Fitzmaurice-Kelly refuses to take Cervantes
seriously, and he asserts that it “requires the eye of faith to see any
high form of dramatic talent in the examples which have come down to
us.” But even as Richilieu plumed himself more upon his small gift as a
poet than his genius as a statesman, and as Napoleon turned from the
planning of world conquests to revise the regulations of the Theâtre
Française, so Cervantes appears to have been observed with an ambition
to shine in the realms of theatrical art. He was, as his biographer
points out, ready at the invitation of

[Illustration]

the manager to supply “tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral,
pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,
tragical-comical-historical-pastoral ... and so contagious, so
irresistible was his sublime self-confidence, that he actually persuaded
managers into a belief in him.” And, despite the modesty of his prefaces
there is no grounds for challenging the truth of Mr. Kelly’s conclusion
that Cervantes was immensely proud of his dramatic work. “No man,” says
this writer, “was more sublimely confident of the sincerity of his own
mission; no man more certain that he deserved success. Years afterwards,
when he had found his true way, when the fame of the author of _Don
Quixote_ was gone abroad in every land, he still turned his wistful eyes
to the memory of the days when he had hoped to win immortality upon the
stage. Nor does he ever seemed to have imagined that the cause of
failure lay in himself. Even his hopeful spirit was a little staggered
by the knowledge that his plays could get no hearing. That was a fact
which no amount of self-delusion could blink; and Cervantes accounted
for it by assuming, not that his plays were poor, but that he had fallen
on evil days.”

Cervantes, according to Mr. Watts’s computation, was writing for the
stage two years before Lope de Vega made his appearance as a dramatist.
But the younger man carried everything in the theatrical world before
him from the first. He came, and saw, and conquered, and Cervantes was
swept from the arena by his triumphant onrush. “I gave up the pen and
comedies,” Cervantes admits, “and there entered presently that prodigy
of nature, the great Lope de Vega, and assumed the dramatic throne. He
subjected all the actors, and placed them under his jurisdiction. He
filled the world with comedies--suitable, felicitous, and
well-worded--and so many that those in writing exceeded 10,000 sheets,
all of which have been represented.” Cervantes scarcely overstated the
fecundity of his rival. Vega flooded the theatres of Spain with an
unending stream of plays of every description, and Montalvon records of
this prodigy that he could turn out a comedy of more than 2,400 lines,
complete with plot, dialogue, and stage directions, in twenty-four
hours. In forty years he wrote upwards of eighteen hundred three-act
comedies, besides poems, stories, and other literary exercises, of
which, outside the little circle of savants and students, not
half-a-dozen are to-day remembered even by name. Unless he was really
the author of the false second part of _Don Quixote_, it may be said
that not a line of Lope de Vega’s prodigious output is now either read
or discussed.

With the star of Lope de Vega in the ascendant Cervantes found his stage
occupation gone, and he appears to have cast about for some other
employment that would enable him to support his household. While he was
turning out plays at the rate of eight to ten a year, his income, if not
large, was at least sufficient for his modest requirements; but the

[Illustration]

possibility of being able to make a competence by his pen in any other
branch of letters impressed him so little that he removed his family to
Seville, and re-entered the king’s service in a civil capacity. The next
twenty years were to be the hardest and the leanest in his hard, lean
life, and during all this time he wrote little and published nothing.
His appointment as a commissary is signed 12th June, 1588, and by virtue
of his office he was engaged in the purchase of grain and oil for the
provisioning of the fleets and armaments of the Indies. Many receipts,
invoices, and official papers written out by Cervantes in a clear, bold
hand are in existence, though not a line of his other manuscripts has
been preserved. His official duties were uncongenial and poorly paid,
and in 1590 he addressed the memorial to the king, which amplifies and
confirms our record of his military service. In this memorial, he “prays
and beseeches humbly, so far as he can, that your Majesty should bestow
on him the favour of a place in the Indies, of the three or four which
are now vacant, one of them the accountantship of the new kingdom of
Granada, or the governorship of the province of Soconuso in Guatemala,
or treasurer of the galleys of Carthagena, or magistrate of the city of
La Paz.” If the king considered this petition seriously, and examined
the qualifications that Cervantes possessed for the discharge of
treasury or accountancy duties, and if he came to the conclusion that
such offices could be more capably filled by other and less deserving
men, the world will scarcely question his judgment. For although our
author emerged from all his misfortunes with an honourable name and an
unblemished reputation, it must be confessed that the incapacity he
betrayed in the execution of his official tasks proved him unequal to
the responsibilities of a more exalted official position. His naturally
liberal disposition, his unmethodical habits, and his quixotic
confidence in his fellow-men, were so many disabilities in the equipment
of a commissary and tax-collector under Philip II.

The good nature and bad luck which at all times militated against the
success of Cervantes, thwarted his civil aspirations; but his first
incarceration, which occurred in 1592, arose from an excess of zeal on
behalf of the Royal Treasury. He overlooked the important fact that the
clergy were exempt from taxation, and for the heinous offence of laying
an embargo on wheat belonging to a priest, he served a term of three
months in the prison of Castro del Rio, of Ecija. In 1595 he won the
prize of three silver spoons for the best set of verses written in
honour of San Jacinto on the occasion of his canonisation at Zaragoza;
and in the following year he was again thrown into prison, this time
through the defalcation of an agent, by whom he remitted a sum of 7,400
_reals_ from Seville to Madrid. As his official salary was only 3,000
_reals_ a year, such a liability must have appeared to him to be
practically indischargeable. But by the recovery of 2,600 _reals_

[Illustration]

from the estate of his defaulting agent, Cervantes obtained his liberty;
and although he was re-arrested at a later period for delay in his
repayments of the balance, his personal rectitude was in no way
impugned.

But while his days were full of petty duties and financial troubles, he
appeared to have found leisure for literary exercises, and there can be
no doubt but that during these dead years he wrote the majority of his
novels. If, however, he attempted to find a publisher for his work his
efforts were ineffectual, and his fortunes fell to such a low ebb that
he was dependant at times upon the benevolence of his friends for the
necessities of life. Two sonnets, which he wrote about this period, are
considered the best examples of his skill in this style of composition
that have come down to us. In the one he ridicules the incredible delay
of the great Duke of Medina Sidonia in coming to the relief of Cadiz
after that city had been destroyed by the English, under Lord Howard of
Effingham and the Earl of Essex, and in the other he satirises the
extravagant splendour and “profane magnificence” which was lavished on
the catafalque of Philip II. in Seville.

The exact date on which Cervantes made his home in La Mancha, and the
circumstances which governed his change of habitation, are unknown. That
he had resigned, or lost, his post of commissary is evident, since we
find him employed by the Grand Priory of San Juan, in the collection of
overdue rents in the neighbourhood of Argamasilla. The exercise of such
a calling would naturally make him unpopular with the local community;
but whether his duties would in themselves bring him under the notice of
the authorities, or whether, as it is said, he supplemented his
unwelcome office by satirising the chief citizens, it is practically
certain that he was seized and imprisoned for several weeks. In a letter
he wrote to an uncle praying for assistance in this new affliction, he
says, “Long days and troubled nights are wearing me out in this cell, or
I should say cavern”; and if the underground cellar in the _Casa de
Medrano_, which is still pointed out to visitors, was the scene of his
durance, his condition was not overstated. _Don Quixote_ was, it is
generally believed, “engendered in this prison,” but since the cell is
too dark for the exercise of penmanship, it may be presumed that the
author whiled away his solitude by moulding and rehearsing the scenes in
his mind. But it is as well to bear in mind that Mr. Kelly has cast
grave doubts upon the authenticity of this letter. The original is
unknown; Sánchez Liaño himself, who is responsible for the story, states
that he only had a copy of it; the fact that it was written from
Argamasilla is unsupported; and his biographer asserts that there is not
a jot of absolute evidence to prove that Cervantes ever suffered
imprisonment at Argamasilla at all. But though the story rests chiefly
upon tradition, it has a savour of veracity about it; and while it
neither adds to or detracts

[Illustration]

from the fame of Cervantes, it is one of those stories which the public
will not lightly relinquish.

Near by the house in the _Casa de Medrano_ stands the parish church of
Argamasilla, where, in one of the side chapels, hangs a picture,
representing a lady and gentleman kneeling devoutly before a vision of
the Virgin. The gentleman has a typical Spanish caste of countenance,
with high cheek bones and lantern jaws, a dust complexion, wandering
eyes, and large moustachios. The inscription beneath the portraits
explains that the gentleman had been cured by Our Lady of a mental
affliction, and that the young, and not uncomely, lady by his side was
his niece. The donor of the picture, whose lineaments are portrayed
therein, was one, Rodrigo Pacheco, who was the owner of the house in the
_Casa de Medrano_ at the time that Cervantes sojourned in La Mancha. It
was probably by Pacheco’s order that Cervantes was lodged in the dungeon
beneath his house. Upon these traditional particulars the good people of
Argamasilla have based their legend, which identifies Cervantes with
their city, and makes one of their leading citizens the original of _Don
Quixote_. If the legend be true, and there would appear to be no
substantial reason for doubting it, we may dismiss the idea that the
author had departed from the principles he laid down as worthy of
adoption by all writers. Supposing that he selected this individual as
the victim of his satirical bent, we may learn from the affection with
which he develops the character of the afflicted knight, how little of
rancour and uncharitableness had place in his heart. It must be conceded
that he made merry at the expense of the Manchegans and their customs,
but he did it with so glad a humour, and such gentle sarcasm, that La
Mancha to-day is proud of the fame it has achieved in his immortal
pages, and reveres the memory of their adopted townsman as piously as if
he were their patron Saint. But if, as internal evidence gives some
excuse for believing, _Don Quixote_ was commenced before the death of
Philip II., this interesting and circumstantially-proved legend becomes
no more than a literary tradition, since that monarch had died before
Cervantes quitted Seville.

The only authenticated detail that we have of Cervantes’ career between
1598 and 1602 is this incident of his imprisonment at Argamasilla. When
next we hear of him, in 1603, he is among the unrewarded soldiers and
unrecognised men of letters who crowded the outer precincts of the Court
of Philip III., at Valladolid. The king, though priest-ridden, and
lacking in force of character, was not devoid of a kindly tolerance for
learning, but the crumbs of royal favour were distributed by the
ostentatious and uncultured Duke of Lerma, who despised literature, and
had his own ends to serve by the allocation of the kingly bounty. From
Lerma, as far as his biographers can discover, Cervantes received
nothing; but in the Duke of Béjar--a nobleman, distinguished in arms and
in poesy, and in his

[Illustration]

love of romances of chivalry, such as were still the vogue in Spain--he
found a patron. But the Duke might almost have been described as an
hereditary patron of works of chivalry, and when he learned the nature
and object of _Don Quixote_, for which the influence of his name had
been obtained, he withdrew his patronage. Cervantes prevailed upon the
Duke to listen to the reading of a chapter from the book before making
his decision absolute, and, according to Vicente de los Rios, who is
responsible for the story, his Grace was so delighted with the humour
and humanity of the history, that he reversed his verdict, and consented
to accept the dedication. The king’s printer, Francisco de Robles,
having secured a ten years’ copyright in the work, the privilege of
publication was granted on 26th September, 1604, and the book was issued
from the press of Juan de la Cuesta, at Madrid, in January, 1605.

The success of “the book of humanity,” as Sainte-Beuve has happily
described _Don Quixote_, was instantaneous and unprecedented, up to that
date, in the world of letters. Spain rang with admiration and plaudits
of this inspired story-teller and of the story, the like of which had
never before been told. In an age when readers were few, the book was
widely read, and in a country where the buying of books was a limited
indulgence, the book sold in its thousands. Mr. Watts estimates that no
fewer than 4,000 copies went into circulation in 1605. Copies of six
editions, published in that year, are extant--Madrid, Lisbon, and
Valencia each being responsible for two editions within a few months of
its first appearance. So competent an authority as Señor Gayangos is of
opinion that further impressions were printed at Barcelona, Pamplona,
and Zaragoza. Prior to the publication of _Don Quixote_, no masterpiece
of fiction had ever found so enthusiastic a public, or a sale so
enormous. It became in a flash the common-place book of the nation.
Cervantes tells us, through the mouth of the Bachelor Carrasco, in the
Second Part, which was not published until ten years later: “I do not in
the least doubt but at this day there have been published about 12,000
of it. Portugal, Barcelona, and Valencia, where they have been printed,
can witness that, if there were occasion. It is said that it is also now
in the press at Antwerp. And I verily believe there is scarce a language
into which it is not to be translated.” In the same forty-fourth Chapter
of the Second Part, the rightly proud and complacent author speaks no
more than the literal truth when he says of it: “The author has made
everything so plain that there is nothing in that book but what anyone
may understand. Children handle it, youngsters read it, grown men
understand it, and old people applaud it. In short, it is universally so
thumbed, so gleaned, so studied, and so known, that if the people do but
see a lean horse, they presently cry, ‘There goes Rozinante.’ But no

[Illustration]

description of persons is so devoted to it as your pages; there is not a
nobleman’s ante-chamber in which you will not find a _Don Quixote_. If
one lays it down, another takes it up; while one is asking for it,
another one snatches it; in short, this history affords the most
pleasing and least prejudicial entertainment that ever was published,
for there is not so much as the appearance of an immodest word in it,
nor a thought that is not entirely catholic.”

Concerning the publication and popularity of _Don Quixote_, many stories
of varying degrees of improbability have sprung up, and are common to
most of the biographies of Cervantes. But the following incident,
showing that “even in his lifetime the author obtained the glory of
having his work receive a royal approbation,” is culled from an
anonymous “tract” published in 1853. The author does not quote any
authority for the narrative, which I have not encountered elsewhere. “As
Philip III.,” says this chronicler, “was standing in a balcony of his
palace at Madrid, viewing the country, he observed a student on the
banks of the river Manzanares reading in a book, and from time to time
breaking off and beating his forehead with extraordinary tokens of
pleasure and delight; upon which the king observed to those about him:
‘That scholar is either mad, or he is reading _Don Quixote_.’ The
biographer rounds up his story with the gratifying assurance that ‘the
latter proved to be the case.’”

It must not be supposed that, amid the almost universal applause which
welcomed the appearance of _Don Quixote_, some discordant notes were not
heard. People of fashion, whose chief literary recreation was the
reading of the very books of chivalry, which Cervantes so boldly and
humourously satirised, regarded it with cold displeasure; the clergy
frowned upon it, and rival authors professed to find it vulgar,
unbecoming, and absurd. But its popularity increased, despite, if not
even by reason of these captious criticisms, and the object of the
author in writing it gave rise to more speculation and disputings than
the interpretation of Ibsen has provoked in recent times. Cervantes
himself declared that he compiled his romance for the purpose of
“causing the false and silly books of chivalries to be abhorred by
mankind,” and in the attainment of this object he was wholly successful.
The publication of such romances suddenly ceased; the writing of them
was abandoned; the creation of these lovelorn shepherds and
shepherdesses, and of impossible cavaliers was arrested as if by magic.
And having marked the effect of the book, the public sought for some
hidden intention that was supposed to work behind the author’s pages,
and were content to find it in the character of the Knight of La Mancha.
They concluded that _Don Quixote_ was intended to satirise someone; but
whom? Was it the prosaic sovereign, Charles V., who was here held up to
ridicule, or the least romantic King Philip II., or that contemptuous
and unlettered disburser of royal

[Illustration]

favours, the Duke of Lerma? But the people who hazarded such wild
guesses must have failed to detect the subtle delicacy and nobility of
the knight’s nature, and the loving sympathy with which Cervantes dwells
upon the wisdom and sterling merit of his hero. Could a man satirise an
enemy with such gentleness and affection? Could a genius like Cervantes
so far overshoot his bolt as to make not only the other characters in
the book, but all the reading world, honour and love the figure that he
purposed to hold up to ridicule?

If Cervantes, in writing _Don Quixote_, was laughing away Spain’s
chivalry, as Lord Byron erroneously declared, then he was the target of
his own destructive cynicism, for the story of his career is that of a
man who practised a chivalry which was already extinct in Spain, and
maintained unswervingly a code of honour which had fallen into
desuetude. If Montesquieu’s similarly extravagant comment that “the
Spaniards have but one book--that which has made all the others
ridiculous” comes nearer to the truth, it must be conceded that the
romances which Cervantes exterminated were scarcely worth preserving.
But the book affords also another proof that truth surpasses fiction in
strangeness, since the popularity of _Don Quixote_, its effect, and its
immortality surprised no one so much as its author. Having disposed of
his rights in the publication to Francisco de Robles--the sum he
obtained for them is nowhere mentioned, but it may be surmised that it
was all too small for his need--Cervantes proceeded about his daily
task of providing bread for his family, and left this “child of his
sterile, ill-cultured wit” to its fate. He remained in Valladolid while
his book was being printed at Madrid, and the number of glaring and
absurd errors that marred the first edition is proof positive that he
did not see a single sheet. Many of these more palpable blunders were
absent from the 1608 edition which was revised by the author, who was
then resident in the capital.

Mr. Watts, who has evidently made a close and scholarly study of the old
romances of chivalry which _Don Quixote_ brought into such sudden
disfavour, has endeavoured, as I think, with much plausibility, to
demonstrate Cervantes’ precise attitude towards this class of
literature. Having traced the romantic vein from its genesis to the time
when the author of _Galatea_ employed it as his model, and eulogised in
high terms such examples of the genre as _Amadis of Gaul_ and _Palmerin
of England_, Mr. Watts points out that Cervantes carefully
differentiated between the romances of merit and the nautiating
imitations; that he was one of the most omniverious readers of such
books in that age, and the most deeply-imbued with their spirit. He
specially and enthusiastically praises the good volumes among the bad in
Don Quixote’s library; he praises again, through the mouth of the Canon
of Toledo, the feeling of romances of chivalry, and lays down the rules
on which such a history should be written. If he had

[Illustration]

any other object in composing _Don Quixote_ than to “write out of the
fulness of his own heart,” it was to check the perpetration of fatuous
and mischievous stories which were bringing into disrepute and ridicule
his old and well-loved stories of chivalry and romance. The secret of
the enduring success of _Don Quixote_, Mr. Watts concludes, is not to be
found in its motive, but in the fact that the romance was drawn from the
story of the author’s own life. “The hero himself, the enthusiast,
nursed on visions of chivalry, who is ever mocked by fortune; the
reviver of the old knighthood, who is buffeted by clowns and made sport
of by the baser sort; who, in spite of the frequent blows, jeers,
reverses, and indignities he receives, never ceases to command our love
and sympathy--who is he but the man of Lepanto himself, whose life is a
romance at least as various, eventful, and arduous; as full of
hardships, troubles, and sadness; as prolific of surprising adventures
and strange accidents as the immortal story he has written? This is the
key to _Don Quixote_, which, unless we use, we shall not reach the heart
of the mystery.”

Let us linger for awhile with Cervantes in the great square and broad
streets of Valladolid. To-day, Valladolid, “the Rich,” is a fallen city.
Here still stand the old Royal Palace, upon which Cervantes’ eyes must
so often have rested--a ruin. The great Cathedral, an imposing mass of
granite, which was begun in 1585, is still unfinished. Here still stand
the house in the Calle de Colon, in which Columbus died; and Cervantes’
own lodging at No. 14, Calle de Rastro; and the huge Plaza Major where,
on October 7th, 1559, Philip II. celebrated the first memorable Auto de
Fé, and which was, in Cervantes’ day, the meeting place of all the poets
and soldiers, the historians and savants, who haunted the Court of His
Most Religious Majesty. Here Cervantes remained while his work
circulated throughout the country, and overflowed into every country in
Europe.

Would you know the social conditions that prevailed in Spain in the
latter half of the sixteenth century? You can obtain the information in
“_The Life and Achievement of Don Quixote de la Mancha_.” If you would
have wit and wisdom, or if you would take humanity to be your study, you
have only to turn to this same work. If you seek to realise the
condition under which a man bore arms, or wielded a pen, under that
royal barbarian, Philip II., you must have resource to this history.
Would you understand Cervantes’ own experience in arms and in letters?
Turn to Chapter xxxi. of the First Part of _Don Quixote_. What higher
ideal ever had any man, both for the soldier and the writer? Listen to
the Don in what Cervantes assures his readers is his hero’s most
rational and logical humour: “Now the end and design of letters,” he
says, “is to regulate distributive justice, and give to every man his
due; to institute good laws, and cause

[Illustration]

them to be strictly observed; an end most certainly generous and
exalted, and worthy of high commendation; but not equal to that which is
annexed to the profession of arms, the object and end of which is peace,
the greatest blessing mortals can wish for in this wearisome life.”

The purpose of letters has never been placed on a higher standard, and
militarism is robbed of its sordidness in his definition of its aims.
Cervantes was a soldier and an author by trade, let us listen to his
verdict when, granting that the end of war is peace, and that in this it
has the advantage of the end proposed by letters, he weighs the labours
of the scholar against those of the warrior, and decides on which side
the balance turns.

“I say then,” he asserts, “that the hardships of the scholar are these:
in the first place poverty; not that they are all poor, but I would put
the case in the strongest manner possible; and when I have mentioned
that the scholar endures poverty, no more need be said to evince his
misery; for he that is poor is destitute of every good thing, he has to
contend with misery in all its forms, sometimes in hunger, sometimes in
cold, sometimes in nakedness, and sometimes in all these together. Yet
his necessity is not so great but that still he eats, though somewhat
later than usual, either by partaking of the rich man’s scraps and
leavings, or, which is his greatest misery, by going a sopping. Neither
does he always want the fireside or chimney-corner of some charitable
person, where, if he is not quite warmed, at least the extreme cold is
abated; and, lastly, at night he sleeps under cover. I will not mention
other trifles, such as want of linen, deficiency of shoes, his thin and
threadbare clothes, not the surfeits to which he is liable from
intemperance, when good fortune sets a plentiful table in his way. By
this path, rough and difficult as I have described it, now stumbling,
now falling, now rising, then falling and rising again, do scholars
arrive at last to the end of their wishes; which, being attained, we
have seen many who, having passed these Syrtes, these Scyllas, these
Charybdisis, buoyed up, as it were, by a favourable tide, have exercised
authority from a chair of state, and governed the world; their hunger
converted into satiety, their pinching cold into refreshing coolness,
their nakedness into embroidered raiment, and their bare mats to beds of
down, with furniture of fine holland and damask, a reward justly merited
by their virtues.

“But their hardships, when fairly brought together and compared, fall
short of those of the warrior, as I shall presently demonstrate. Since,
in speaking of the scholar, we began with his poverty and its several
branches, let us see how it is with the soldier in that respect, and we
shall find that such is his lot poverty itself is not poorer, for he
depends on his wretched pay, which comes late, or perhaps never, or what
he can plunder, with great peril both of life and conscience. Sometimes
his want of clothing is

[Illustration]

such that his slashed buff doublet serves him both for doublet and for
shirt; and in the midst of Winter, being in the open field, he has
nothing but the breath of his mouth to warm him, which, issuing from an
empty stomach, must needs be cold, against all the rules of Nature. But
come, Night, and let us see whether bed will make amends for these
inconveniences. If it be not his own fault, it will never offend in
point of narrowness, for he may measure out as many feet of earth as he
pleases, and roll himself thereon at leisure, without fear of rumpling
the sheets.

“Suppose, again, the day and hour arrived of taking the degree of his
profession. I mean, suppose the day of battle come, wherein he is to put
in practice the exercise of his profession, and strike to gain some new
honour, then, as a mark of distinction, shall his head be dignified by a
cap made of lint, to stop a hole made by a bullet, or perhaps be carried
off maimed, at the expense of a leg or arm. And if this do not happen,
but that merciful Heaven preserve his life and limbs, it may fall out
that he shall remain as poor as before, and must run through many
encounters and battles, nay, always come off victorious, to obtain some
small preferment--and these miracles, too, are rare--but, I pray tell
me, if ever you made it your observation, how few are those who obtain
due rewards in war, in comparison of those numbers who perish? Doubtless
you will answer that there is no parity between them, that the dead
cannot be reckoned up; whereas those who live and are rewarded may be
numbered with three figures.

“It is quite otherwise with scholars, not only those who follow the
lead, but others also, who all either by hook or by crook get a
livelihood; so that though the soldier’s sufferings be much greater, yet
his reward is much less. To this it may be answered, that it is easier
to reward two thousand scholars than thirty thousand soldiers, because
the former are recompensed at the expense of the public, by giving them
employment, but the latter cannot be gratified but at the cost of the
master that employs them: yet this very difficulty makes good my
argument. Now for a man to attain to an eminent degree of learning costs
him time, watching, hunger, nakedness, dizziness in the head, weakness
in the stomach, and other inconveniences, which are the consequence of
those, of which I have already in part made mention. But the rising
gradually to be a good soldier is purchased at the whole expense of all
that is required for learning, and that in so surpassing a degree that
there is no comparison betwixt them, because he is every moment in
danger of his life. To what danger or distress can a scholar be reduced
equal to that of a soldier, who, being besieged in some strong place,
and at his post in some ravelin or bastion, perceives the enemy carrying
on a mine under him, and yet must upon no account remove from thence, or
shun the danger which threatens him? All he can do is to give notice to
his commander that he may countermine, but must himself stand still,
fearing and expecting when on a sudden he shall soar to the clouds
without wings, and be again cast down headlong against his will. If this
danger seems inconsiderable, let us see whether there be not greater
when two galleys shock one another with their prows in the midst of the
spacious sea. When they have thus grappled, and are clinging together,
the soldier is confined to the narrow gangway, being a board not above
two feet wide; and yet though he sees before him so many ministers of
death threatening, as there are pieces of cannon on the other side
pointing against him, and not half a pike’s length from his body; and
being sensible that the first slip of his feet sends him to the bottom
of Neptune’s dominions--still, for all this, inspired by honour, with an
undaunted heart, he stands a mark to so much fire, and endeavours to
make his way by that narrow passage into the enemy’s vessel. But what is
most to be admired is, that no sooner one falls, where he shall never
rise till the end of the world, than another steps into the same place;
and if he also drops into the sea, which lies in wait for him like an
enemy, another, and after him another, stills fills up the place,
without suffering any interval of time to separate their deaths, a
resolution and boldness scarce to be paralleled in any other trials of
war. Blessed be those happy ages that were strangers to the dreadful
fury of those devilish instruments of artillery which is the cause that
very often a cowardly, base hand takes away the life of the bravest
gentleman; and that in the midst of that vigour and resolution which
animates and inflames the bold, a chance bullet (shot perhaps by one
that fled, and was frightened at the very flash which the mischievous
piece gave when it went off) coming nobody knows how or from whence, in
a moment puts a period to the brave designs and the life of one that
deserved to have survived many years.”

I have quoted thus freely because the passage illustrates better than
pages of comment, the high ideals that inspired Cervantes both in the
tented field and in the long solitude of his poor study. He fought as he
wrote like a Christian gentleman; and if, in his lifetime, arms did not
bring him honours, nor letters riches, posterity is agreed to recognise
in him one of the truest soldiers and greatest writers of all times. It
was his persistent evil chance which, when he had abandoned the perilous
calling of a warrior, should dog his steps with sufferings from which
the writer is usually exempt. In June, 1605 within a month or two of the
publication of _Don Quixote_, a court gallant, Don Gaspar de Ezpeleta,
was suddenly assailed by two men, wounded and left for dead in the
street before Cervantes’ house. The author and his family hearing his
cries carried the stricken man into their lodging, where he died in a
few hours. Justice, in taking up the affair, clapped

[Illustration: DON QUIXOTE AND SANCHO PANZA.

(OLDEST PLATE.)

_Paris, 1622._

_First Edition._]

Cervantes and his family in gaol, where they were detained until the
result of the inquiry exonerated them from playing anything but the
Samaritan’s part in the matter. This too, as Edmondo de Amicis reflects,
had to fall to the lot of the poor author of _Don Quixote_, so that he
could be said to have experienced every kind of trial.

“We crossed the Mancha,” writes de Amicis in another reference to
Cervantes in his work on _Spain_, “the celebrated Mancha, the immortal
theatre of the adventures of Don Quixote. It is just as I imagined it.
There are broad, bare plains, long tracts of sandy earth, some
windmills, a few miserable villages, solitary paths, and wretched,
abandoned houses. On seeing those places I experienced a feeling of
melancholy which the perusal of Cervantes’ book always rouses; and I
repeated to myself what I always say in reading it: ‘This man cannot
make one laugh; or, if he does, under the smile, the tears are springing
up.’ Don Quixote is a sad and solemn character; his mania is a lament;
his life is the history of the dreams, illusions, disappointments and
aberrations of us all; the struggle of reason with the imagination, of
the true with the false, the ideal with the real! We all have something
of Don Quixote about us; we all take windmills for giants; all are
spurred upward from time to time by an impulse of enthusiasm, and driven
back by a laugh of disdain; are all a mixture of the sublime and the
ridiculous, and feel, with profound bitterness, the perpetual contrast
between the greatness of our aspirations and the weakness of our
powers.”

One reads the opinion of the eminent Italian author, and it but confirms
the opinion that Mr. Watts is doubtless right in his belief that Don
Quixote and the man of Lepanto are one and the same.

From the depositions made at this inquiry into the murder of Ezpeleta,
which have been preserved, we learn that the family, which was at this
time dependent upon Cervantes, consisted of his wife, his natural
daughter Isabel, aged twenty; his widowed sister, Andrea, aged
sixty-one; a cousin, Dona Magdalena de Sotomayor, a lady of forty; and
their servant, Maria. The household followed the Court to Madrid in
1606, where Cervantes found two eminent, if not by any means prodigal,
patrons in Bernardo Sandoval y Rojas, the Cardinal-Archbishop of Toledo,
and the Conde de Lemos, nephew and son-in-law of the Duke de Lerma. But
if the Inquisitor-General, who ranked after the Pope as the most
powerful Prelate in Christendom, was not lavish in his disbursements of
patrimony, his patronage saved the author from molestation at the hands
of the Inquisition, and it was not until the death of Archbishop
Sandoval that the Holy Office cast a censorial eye upon _Don Quixote_,
and expunged certain passages which did not meet with its approval.

For the next seven years Cervantes appears to have published nothing,
and it may be assumed that

[Illustration: FIGHT BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND THE BISCAYAN.

_Paris, 1713._

_5th Edition._]

he eked out a precarious existence by undertaking clerical work, and on
the occasional alms doled out to him by his patrons. We know, from the
evidence given at the inquiry before the Alcade at Valladolid, that he
“wrote and transacted business,” and that his slender means were
augmented by the sale of needlework made by the women of his household.
His fame, as the author of _Don Quixote_, would give him entrance to the
intellectual circle of Madrid, and there seems no reason to doubt the
statement of his biographer, Navarrete, that he joined the Literary
Society, known as the Selvages, which included the most eminent men of
letters of Madrid in its membership. We learn that in 1609 he forearmed
himself against his burial by becoming a lay brother of the Oratory of
the Knights of Grace--a prudent precaution that was customary among men
of letters of the time--where he had, as colleagues, Lope de Vega, and
his good friend, Francisco de Quevedo, one of the few contemporary
writers who never disclosed envy or pretended contempt for the author of
_Don Quixote_.

Of some of Cervantes’ other friends at this time it is not possible to
speak in the same terms. Lope de Vega was always jealous of his genius
and his comparatively limited meed of popularity; Luis de Leon, whom,
Cervantes said, “I revere, adore, and follow,” and Fernando de Herrera
were dead; Luis de Góngora disliked him, and the brothers Lupercio and
Bartolomé Argénsola returned his good-natured eulogies with envy and
evil works, and by their intriguing they prevented the Conde de Lemos
from redeeming the promise of employment he had made Cervantes when that
nobleman was appointed Viceroy of Naples. Cervantes also had friends
among the painters of the period, and was warmly attached to the two
then celebrated artists, Juan de Jaureguy and Francisco Pacheco. Our
author tells us, in his prologue to _Novelas Exemplares_, that Jaureguy
had painted his picture, and he also figured among the 170 portraits of
eminent contemporaries, which Pacheco made in black and red chalk. This
collection, which was presented by the painter to Olivares, the generous
art patron and celebrated minister of Philip IV., was broken up after
his death, and is now reduced to fifty-six portraits, but that of
Cervantes is not among the survivors. Nor has any other pictured
memorial of him been preserved. His good-humoured plaint that his
publishers should have reproduced an engraving of Jaureguy’s picture on
the first leaf of _Novelas Exemplares_ has since been echoed in all
sincerity. Two hundred years after his death it suddenly dawned upon
Spain that no portrait of this, one of her greatest sons, was in
existence, or if such a work existed it has not yet been found.

Lord Carteret, who brought out his handsomely-printed and bound edition
of _Don Quixote_ in 1738, was arrested in his efforts on the eve of
publication by the discovery that the engraving of Cervantes, which he
desired to make his frontispiece, could not be reproduced for want of
an original likeness from which to make a copy. The British Ambassador,
at Madrid, instituted an energetic search in Spain, but he could find no
trace of the pictures which it was known had been painted, and Lord
Carteret commissioned William Kent to execute the necessary portrait.
Kent followed faithfully the details which the author had revealed of
his features and outward appearance in the preface to _Novelas
Exemplares_; and in order to fend himself from any charge of deception
he labelled it, “Portrait of Miguel de Cervantes by Himself.” William
Kent’s imaginary portrait--a three-quarter length painting of a man in
the prime of life of the stately and ultra-Spanish type of countenance,
splendidly attired in ruffs and frills to resemble an exquisite of the
period, has been used as the basis of all subsequent portraits of
Cervantes. It is fanciful, somewhat ridiculous--since Cervantes never
boasted purple and fine linen for his adornment--incorrect,--for the man
of Lepanto’s maimed hand is represented as amputated--and generally
misleading. But the conventional portrait and fanciful invention of
Kent--the hooked nose, large moustache, round eyes and baby
mouth--appealed to the Spanish imagination; and when, in 1780, the
Spanish Academy published their own first classical edition of _Don
Quixote_, a variant of Kent’s portrait graced the work. They declared,
in the first place, that their discovery was from the brush of Alonso
del Arco, but when it was pointed out that the deaf and dumb painter
was not born until nine years after the death of the author, they
declared it a copy of an original painted by one of Cervantes’
contemporaries. When the strong family resemblance between the Alonso de
Arco portrait and that of William Kent was insisted upon, the Spanish
Academy decided that the English picture was a copy of their discovered
prize, and with that explanation they professed themselves entirely
contented.

What is probably an equally unauthentic portrait of Cervantes, but one
based upon a more ingenious and plausible theory, was unearthed by the
energies of Don José Maria Asensio of Seville, who, in an anonymous
manuscript, happened upon a note to the effect that in one of six
pictures, painted by Pacheco for a convent at Seville, there was a
portrait of Cervantes. Armed with this clue, Señor Asensio went to the
Provincial Museum of Seville, and made a careful inspection of the
pictures which were painted to commemorate the effective labours of the
Redemptorist brethren in releasing captives from Algiers. In one of
these, entitled “St. Peter of Nola, in one of the Passages of his Life,”
the saint is represented as superintending the launching of a boat.
Among the half-dozen figures in the foreground, which are declared to be
all portraits, is a man under middle age, with a striking head set upon
a strong neck and shoulders, and with the defect of the left hand
seemingly disguised by obscure

[Illustration: DON QUIXOTE DISCOURSING ON THE GOLDEN AGE.

_London, 1738._

_7th Edition._]

painting. The fine eyes are set beneath a broad forehead, the nose is
prominent and well defined, while the weakness in the chin and jaw are
not uncharacteristic of the general character of Cervantes. These
features are, moreover, in keeping with the description which the author
has given us of himself in the prologue of _Novelas Exemplares_, already
referred to, and which, of course, was followed by William Kent. Thus he
presents himself to his readers: “He, whom you see here, of aquiline
feature, with chestnut hair, a smooth, unruffled forehead, with
sparkling eyes, and a nose arched though well proportioned; a beard of
silver, which, not twenty years since, was of gold; great moustaches, a
small mouth, the teeth of no account, for he has but six of them, and
they in bad condition and worse arranged, for they do not hold
correspondence one with another; the body between two extremes, neither
great nor little; the complexion bright, rather white than brown,
somewhat heavy in the shoulders. This, I say, is the aspect of the
author of _Don Quixote of La Mancha_.” With this detailed description we
must be content; and if it is not a portrait, it is sufficient to afford
us material for recreating a picture of Cervantes according to our
individual tastes.

It is generally agreed that the novels which Cervantes published in
1613, under the title of _Novelas Exemplares_--because “there is not one
of them from which some profitable example cannot be drawn”--were
written many years before, but there seems equally as good reason for
supposing that they were the results of his last seven years residence
in Madrid. In variety of subject and manner, in the extraordinary
knowledge of life that they reveal, in the mature art with which they
are told, they exhibit the hand of the experienced craftsman, and
warrant the eulogy of the author, who wrote of them that “had they not
been turned out of the workshop of his wit, he might presume to place
them by the side of the best ever designed.” After _Don Quixote_, they
are reckoned in Spain amongst the best stories of their kind in the
language; but they have achieved little popularity out of the Peninsula.
Yet they have not been without their fervent admirers in this country,
and amongst them Sir Walter Scott must be acknowledged the chief, since
Lockhart declares that it was these stories of Cervantes that inspired
the author of the Waverley novels to his first essay in fiction.

In the following year, 1614, Cervantes published two volumes of his
writings, _Viaja del Parnaso_ and a collection of plays. The poem,
though based on an ingenious idea, and containing some of the best verse
which the poet has given us, justifies the contemporary verdict upon his
compositions, which was, as Cervantes himself tells us, that “of his
prose much was to be expected, but of his verse nothing.” The _Journey
Around Parnassus_ is written in imitation of a poem, now forgotten, by
the Italian author, Cesare Caporali, and it serves as a record of the
names of a string of Spanish minor poets whom Cervantes praises with
more credit to his heart than his discrimination. His own generation
allowed the book to fall still-born from the press, and its one interest
to modern Cervantists lies in the autobiographical details which are to
be found in the prose prefix. We read here that he is residing in the
_Calle de las Huertas_, in a house “over against the mansion where the
Prince of Morocco used to live;” we are introduced to the beruffled,
exquisite, and would-be poet (by the correction of whose verses
Cervantes doubtless derived part of his slender income); we learn that
his niece paid a _real_ for postage on a letter which contained nothing
more valuable than an anonymous, defamatory sonnet upon the author of
_Don Quixote_; and, finally, we are told that the writer has in hand a
dozen comedies and farces in equal proportions, which, having been
rejected of theatre-managers, he proposes to present to the world in
book form.

The volume of eight comedies and eight farces here referred to was
published in the same year. A bookseller, being found, willing to take
the risks of publishing them, Cervantes tells us in his preface that he
“made the venture and sold them to the bookseller, who sent them to the
Press. He paid me a reasonable sum for them; I took the money meekly,
without making account of the quirks and quibbles of the players. I
would they were the best in the world, or, at least, of fair worth.” But
the pieces fared no better at the hands of the public than they had
with the theatre-managers. Nor did they deserve a better fate, being
unworthy of the author of _Don Quixote_, or even of the _Numancia_ of
his earlier days. Cervantes, rendered desperate by want, has in these
pages deviated from the principles that he had laid down for his own
guidance, and his object would appear to be to woo the public by
pandering to their debased taste. But as he had before been compelled to
give place, as a playwright, to men who possessed a greater share of
dramatic sense and fitness, so now he was competing vainly with men,
less gifted than himself, who had more accurately gauged the public
taste, and were more dexterous in catering for it. In letters, more
often than in any other branch of the arts, the man of genius who writes
down to his public falls short of success. It is the second-rate writers
who undertake seriously the task which the master attempts, with his
tongue in his cheek and contempt for his output in his heart, who
achieve their object. So Cervantes failed again as a playwright, and he
failed so conspicuously that Blas de Nasarre, who republished these poor
farces and more inferior comedies in 1749, claimed that the author had
written them in ridicule of Lope de Vega, just as he had written _Don
Quixote_ in ridicule of the books of chivalry; while his always
appreciative biographer, H. E. Watts, concludes that Cervantes “intended
them as specimens of the drama which was in vogue in his day, rather
than as

[Illustration: DON QUIXOTE TILTING AGAINST THE ARMY OF ALIFANFARON.

_El Haya, 1746._

_9th Edition._]

models of that true art of which we know he had grasped the principles.”

Cervantes had, we must suppose, been wrenched from his artistic
principles and ideals by the pinch of poverty; yet at this late period
of his life, his fame as an author was spread not only throughout Spain,
but in France, Italy, Germany, and Flanders. When Francisco Marquez
Torres, Chaplain to the Archbishop of Toledo, was interrogated by some
members of the French Embassy in Madrid, as to the age, profession,
quality, and fortune of the celebrated author of _Don Quixote_, Señor
Torres found himself “compelled to say that he was an old man, a
soldier, a gentleman, and poor.” The chaplain, who tells this story in
the approbation prefixed to the Second Part of _Don Quixote_, continues:
“To which one of them responded in these precise words: ‘But does not
Spain keep such a man rich, and supported out of the public Treasury?’
Another of these gentlemen broke in with this idea, saying, with much
acuteness, ‘If it is necessity compels him to write, may God send he may
never have abundance; so that, poor himself, he may make the whole world
rich.’”

Cervantes, in his long and varied career, had suffered much from the
slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, but in the last months of his
life he was to endure the most cruel and malignant hurt that the envy
and enmity of man could inflict on an author. In the summer of 1614,
just two years before his death, when Cervantes was leisurely
completing the second part of the work, which was to make his name
immortal, there appeared at Tarragoza a work entitled, “_The Second Part
of the Ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha, containing his
Third Sally_.” This work, vulgar, lewd and malicious, purposed to be the
continuation and the end of the story which Cervantes had published ten
years before. The name of the author was given as Alonso Fernandez de
Avellaneda, of Tordesillas; the book was dedicated to the “Alcade,
Regidors, and Hidalgos of the noble city of Argamasilla,” &c.; the
licensing for printing was in the handwriting of Doctor Francisco de
Torne, of Liori, Vicar-General to the Archbishop of Tarragona, and the
publication was justified by the contention of one Dr. Rafael Orthoneda,
who declared that it “ought to be printed, because it seemed to him to
contain nothing immodest or forbidden.”

If this publication had revealed no more than a mean and avaricious
desire to profit by the popularity of the First Part of _Don Quixote_,
and to defraud Cervantes by forestalling him in the demand which was in
waiting for the completion of the work; if the author had imitated the
style and spirit of the great original with the sole thought of skimming
Cervantes’ market--even so the outrage would have been almost
unparalleled at that period in the history of letters. But the
conspiracy, for conspiracy it was beyond doubt, was deeper, more subtle
and diabolical

[Illustration: SANCHO PANZA TOSSED IN THE BLANKET.

_Boston, 1837._

_38th Edition._]

in its inspiration and execution. Avellaneda, whoever the man was who
clothed his identity beneath this sobriquet, was a person of some
literary talent, but his malice outstripped his wit, and his humour is
choked with lewdness. The aim and purpose of the book is deliberately
divulged in the prologue, which is nothing less than a savage revilement
of Cervantes. His literary defects are assailed with ungovernable fury;
his age, his poverty, even the wounds, of which he was so proud, are
hurled in his teeth. He is described as having “more tongue than hands;”
his impediment in his speech is made matter for mockery; his state is
compared with the ruined castle of San Cervantes; and his person,
temperament, and condition are summarised in a venemous sentence, in
which he is called “a cripple, a soldier old in years, though youthful
in spirit; envious, discontented, a back-biter, a malefactor, or, at
least, a jail-bird.” It is curious and characteristic of the tone of
this attack that Cervantes, the gallant soldier who had won his wounds
in the service of his country, but who had not allowed his buoyant
spirit or kindliness of heart to be conquered by hardship, penury, and
suffering, should be villified for the very things for which the world
now holds him in love and esteem. Finally, having attempted to belittle
his achievements, and blast his character, his assailant acknowledges
that his book is a deliberate attempt to deprive Cervantes of the profit
expected from his labours.

In the false _Don Quixote_ thus thrust upon the public the whole design
of the original is studied only for the purpose of destroying it; it is
written with the set and determined idea of making the name of the
Knight of La Mancha stink in the nostrils of the admirers of Cervantes.
Here the Don is represented as a common lunatic, who disappears from the
story into an asylum for the insane. Sancho Panza is transformed into a
gluttonous, vulgar, ignoramus. Dorothea, whose grace and daintiness add
fragrance and wit to the original story, becomes a mere wanton. The
whole story reeks of obscenity, vulgarity, and dullness, yet an eminent
cleric licensed it; Le Sage professed to see in it merits equal to the
true history; and the Spanish Academy has preserved the work as being
worthy a place in the national collection of classics. Not a detail is
wanting to detract from the enormity of the outrage, to give Cervantes
the unenviable distinction of being the most basely treated man among
the many unfortunates in literature; for surely, never before or since,
was an author so villainously used.

Nearly three centuries have elapsed since Cervantes laid aside his pen
and rested from the indignities which his generation piled upon him, but
the identity of the author of the crowning indignity of his career is
still to be revealed. Cervantes himself must have had a shrewd suspicion
of the author of this conspiracy, but he either refrained from
publishing his name, or felt too insecure in his facts, to be

[Illustration: ADVENTURE WITH THE LIONS.

_Paris, 1844._

_40th Edition._]

able to prove the charge; or, as his first biographer asserts, his
assailant was so powerful as to defy accusation. The secret was kept, at
the time, with a success that to us seems incomprehensible, and has
created controversy and speculation which has not decreased with years.
But it would appear that until the ploughshare of accident shall turn up
from the fallow earth of the literary past, or until the jealous guard
which is posted over the letters in the _Biblioteca Nacional_ shall be
relaxed, speculation and conjecture are vain. Luis de Aliaga, the King’s
Confessor, Alarcon the Dramatist, Bartolomé de Argénsola, Cervantes’
one-time friend; the monk Perez, who wrote _La Picara Justina_; and the
great Lope de Vega himself have all been laid under the suspicion of
being the writer of the false _Don Quixote_. The weight of
circumstantial evidence bears hardest upon Vega, whose private letters
have disclosed his ill-will and envy towards Cervantes; whose life and
character--despite the arguments urged by his apologists--convict him,
at least, of being capable of committing so foul a deed; and whose
method of waging literary warfare was quite in the manner of the false
Prologue. A man of his arrogant disposition would resent bitterly the
criticism which Cervantes applied to his plans in the First Part of his
_magnum opus_, and we can believe of him that he would stop at nothing
to be revenged upon his critic. A jealous, unscrupulous, intolerant man,
confident of the protection of friends in high places; a libertine who
acted as procurer for the Duke of Sessa; an officer of the Holy
Inquisition; and the only real rival to Cervantes in the arena of
letters--if Lope de Vega did not himself pen the false _Don Quixote_, he
will go down to posterity as the suspected inspirer of the basest
literary atrocity that has ever been perpetrated.

On this point, as on most details affecting Cervantes, Mr.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly is emphatic in his conclusion, and he accepts the
decision by Máinez, that if the hand is the hand of Avellaneda, the
voice is the voice of Lope de Vega. He finds in the character of the
celebrated dramatist the temperamental fitness for such a task, and he
locates the incentive in his unsupportable jealousy. “Till _Don Quixote_
appeared no rival had ever dared to come within the shadow of his
throne, and its lasting success was torment to his soul. It was too
plain that the world had gone stark mad, captivated by the book of the
poverty-stricken, maimed wanderer who, after a life of squalid failure,
had had the assurance to produce a masterpiece. It was no longer
possible to kill _Don Quixote_ by the cheap sneer that no one was such
an ass as to praise it. Lope had played that card, and no longer
cherished any such delusion.... But it was still possible to injure;
still possible to defame; still possible to rob the old man of a few
doubloons; still possible to deride him, to wound his pride, to
forestall his market by writing a continuation of the accursed volume
which had dared to thrust itself

[Illustration: DON QUIXOTE ABSORBED IN THE READING OF BOOKS ON KNIGHT
ERRANTRY.

_Paris, 1845._

_41st Edition._]

between Lope and the public;” and so, though other biographers may
canvass every contemporary writer and weigh the relative qualifications
and provocations of envious poets and resentful prelates, Mr. Kelly
refuses to look beyond Lope de Vega for the author of the false Second
Part of _Don Quixote_.

Germond de Lavigne, with a sophistry, inspired, we may suppose, by
admiration of Vega, declared that we owe a debt to Avellaneda, seeing
that but for him _Don Quixote_ would have remained a mere _torso_,
instead of a complete work. Such a piece of special pleading is, of
course, fallacious, since Cervantes had pledged himself to produce a
second part, and the book must have been nearing completion, in 1614,
when Avellaneda’s travesty was published. It is evident that he had
progressed as far as the nineteenth chapter, and was within ten chapters
of the end, when the Tarragonese bastard was put into circulation, and
Cervantes, changing his published plan of procedure, turns Don Quixote
from his purpose of entering the lists at Zaragoza and hurries him off
to Barcelona. With this counterfeit upon the market Cervantes could no
longer pursue the leisurely tenor of his way, and the injury he had
received spurred him to new flights of pungent humour. But although our
author in this Second Part of _Don Quixote_ deals with his enemy with
dignified restraint, and introduces him in person to drub him with the
jester’s bladder, rather than becudgel him with his own club, we descry
in the dedication of his last book of comedies (1615) how keenly he
felt the smart.

Avellaneda had charged him with disparaging the innumerable “stupendous
comedies” of Lope de Vega, and of persecuting the Inquisition. Cervantes
straightly denies both these imputations, declaring that he “adores
Vega’s genius, and admires his works continuous and virtuous,” and
protests that he is not likely to persecute any ecclesiastic--above all,
if he is a familiar of the Holy Office to boot. “But,” he writes in this
dedication to the Conde de Lemos, “that which I cannot help feeling is
that he charges me with being old and maimed, as though it had been in
my power to stop time from passing over me, or as though my deformity
had been produced in some tavern, and not on the grandest occasion which
ages past and present have seen, or those to come can hope to see. If my
wounds do not shine in the eyes of him who looks on them, they are at
least honoured in the estimation of those who know where they were
acquired; for the soldier looks better dead in battle than alive in
flight. And so much I am of this opinion that if now I could devise and
bring about the impossible, I would rather be present again in that
wonderful action than now be whole of my wounds, without having taken
part therein.”

With this manly and characteristic protest we may, I think, close the
volume of this scandal, and press forward to the near close of
Cervantes’ career.

[Illustration: SANCHO’S DILIGENCE IN ENCHANTING DULCINEA.

_London, 1858._

_47th Edition._]

In this same dedication there is the intimation that _Don Quixote_ is
“waiting in the Second Part, booted and spurred, to do homage” to the
Conde de Lemos, and before the end of the year (1615) the completion of
the great work was published. The book was printed by Juan de la Cuesta,
who had printed the First Part, and Francisco de Robles was again
associated with Cervantes as publisher. The public received the new
volume with the same enthusiasm that they had extended to its
predecessor, and although posthumous criticism has in some instances
refused to regard it as equal in merit to the first instalment--Charles
Lamb went out of his way to refer to it as “that unfortunate Second
Part”--the general reading public of successive generations have agreed
in regarding it as the most diverting half of the novel. Cervantes
himself has declared, through the mouth of the scholar, Samson Carrasco,
that second parts are never good, but this rule found a striking
exception in the case of his own work. With increasing years the author
betrayed no sign of flagging vivacity; experience had lent him a surer
hand in the development of character; and while the Knight of La
Mancha’s adventures take on a less fantastic guise, and his reflections
increase in wisdom, the wit of Sancho Panza broadens and ripens, and the
humanity of the immortal comrades acquires a deeper note. Lamb wrote of
“that unworthy Duke,” and he condemned the Duchess as “most
comtemptible.” Many readers of Cervantes must at times have rebelled
against the ingenuity with which the Don’s ducal entertainers conspired
to make sport of their guest, and have deplored the means they employed
in accomplishing their purpose. But if Cervantes had not had resource to
these exalted conspirators we should have lost the passages between
Sancho and the Duchess, the story of the squire’s government, and the
course prescribed for the disenchantment of Dulcinea del Tobosco--surely
among the most richly humorous chapters in the whole story!--and,
finally, the death-bed scene, with the old knight-errant, disillusioned,
but resigned, dictating his will with his weeping friends around him,
and his faithful squire beseeching him “not to die this time, but even
take my counsel, and live on many years,” since “the maddest thing ever
a man can do is to die!”

Yet in the face of facts there are critics who would argue that the
Second Part was inferior to the First, both as a work of art and as a
commercial venture. It is certainly incorrect to say, as one writer
does, that “when the second part of _Don Quixote_ came before the world
it was universally felt that in nearly every respect it betrayed a great
falling off.” Nor can the following criticism, taken from the same
source, be accepted: “The fire of imagination, which had sustained him
throughout the earlier cycle of adventures, now began to burn low; there
was less wit in the speeches, less vivacity in the conversation, less
humour and pathos in the situations and incidents. He perceived that he
had a great

[Illustration: DON QUIXOTE BECOMING AWARE OF THE CURDS IN HIS HELMET.

_Copenhagen, 1865-1869._

_54th Edition._]

rival to contend with, and that rival was himself. He had, properly
speaking, exhausted his originality in the first part, together with his
store of situations, his brilliancy of wit, his freshness of imagery,
his peculiar power of delineating singular characters, and placing them
in singular circumstances. There is wit in the second part, but it is
pale; comedy, but it is forced; vivacity, but it is artificial. You
discover nearly everywhere comparative poverty of invention, but a
perpetual tendency to imitate himself.”

What shall be said of _Don Quixote_ that has not been said already? or
why should we marvel because different men have read it differently? Is
it the joyfullest of books, as Carlyle calls it, or do we find it, with
Sismondi and De Amicis, the most melancholy of histories? Humour it has,
the ripest and rarest that has ever been translated into our language,
and pathos that touches the depths of the human emotion. Sir Walter
Scott speaks of Cervantes’ humour as “the very poetry of the comic,
founded on a tender sympathy with all forms of existence, though
displaying itself in sportive reflection, and issuing, not in
superficial laughter, but in still smiles, the source of which lies far
deeper”; yet others have declared that it lacks “a thread of pathos.”
Edward Fitzgerald praised it as “the most delightful of books.” Dr.
Johnson declared it to be one of the three books written by a man which
the reader wishes to be longer. From Swift to Heine, from Charles Lamb
to Sainte-Beuve, from Johnson to Schlegel, the literary giants of all
ages and all nationalities have joined in praise of _Don Quixote_.

In England and France and Germany it is still regarded as a romance,
unapproachable in its _genre_; a work of true genius, supreme,
imperishable. But in Spain it has passed from romance, in the national
mind, into the realms of reality. In La Mancha the people point to the
windmills as proof of the Don’s existence; in Argamasilla they show you
the house in which the Knight lived, and draw attention to the ruins of
a large, round window, out of which the curate and the barber consigned
Don Quixote’s library to the flames. Here is the sluggish Guadiana, in
which Sancho Panza’s daughter washed the family linen, and the parish
church which guards the veritable portrait of Rodrigo Pacheco, _alias_
Alonzo Quixano, known to fame as Don Quixote de la Mancha, and variously
styled the Knight of the Lions and the Knight of the Rueful Countenance.
These good, simple Manchegans, who are too wise to mistake _Don Quixote_
for clumsy satire, and recognise the nobility, and wisdom, and virtue of
the gallant, fantastic knight-errant, who is “nobly wild--not mad,” have
not failed to detect the moral for the age, indeed for all ages, which
Mr. Austin Dobson has used as the kernel of his sonnet on the Don:

    “Alas! poor Knight! Alas! poor soul possest!
       Yet would to-day, when courtesy grows chill
     And life’s fine loyalties are turned to jest,
       Some fire of thine might burn within us still!
     Ah, would but one might lay his lance in rest,
       And charge in earnest--were it but a mill!”

[Illustration: WHAT PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS SQUIRE.

_Madrid, 1868._

_58th Edition._]

Cervantes survived the publication of _Don Quixote_ some six
months--long enough to see the false Second Part routed and extinguished
by his own all-conquering creation. Inspired to renewed activity by the
chorus of praise which greeted his latest production, we find him, in
his 69th year, arranging his plans for the output of three more
works--_The Weeks of the Garden_, the second part of the _Galatea_, and
the _Travels of Persiles and Sigismunda_, which latter was to be “either
the worst or the best of books of entertainment in our language.” The
sequel to the _Galatea_ and the projected _Weeks of the Garden_ were
probably never commenced, although he refers to them both again in the
prologue to _Persiles_, which was written on his death-bed, and
published by his widow in 1617.

Although _Persiles and Sigismunda_ has been extravagantly praised by
Valdivielso--“Of the many books written by Cervantes,” he says, “none is
more ingenious, more cultured, or more entertaining”--and although it
has gone into more editions than any of the minor works of its author,
this return to the monstrous artificial style which he had been the
means of destroying, is a paradoxical and incomprehensible variant of
his genius. In the last chapter of _Don Quixote_ he had caused the
Knight to aver: “I now declare myself an enemy to Amadis de Gaul, and
his whole generation; all stories of knight-errantry I detest.” Yet
within a few months of writing this passage he was engaged in
completing a conglomeration of adventures, experienced by a pair of
impossible lovers, under every kind of impossible condition. The Spanish
critics admire the book for the beauty and correctness of the language,
and the grace and charm of its style, but, as a work of creative art, it
lacks invention and originality; and, as a piece of fiction--a “pastime
for the melancholy and mopish soul”--it is tedious and ineffective.

But because it carries with it the biographically-conceived dedication
to the Conde de Lemos, we are grateful to Cervantes for his last
romance. In it we read of the return journey from the famous town of
Esquívias--“famous for a thousand things, one for its illustrious
families, and another for its most illustrious wines”--on which
Cervantes tells us he was overtaken by the grey student on the little
she-ass. His chance companion having addressed him as “the all famous,
the merry writer, and, indeed, the joy of the muses,” they resumed their
journey, in the course of which the infirmity of the merry writer was
touched upon. “At which,” says Cervantes, “the good student checked my
mirth in a moment: ‘This malady is the dropsy, which not all the water
of ocean, let it be ever so sweet drinking, can cure. Let your worship,
Señor Cervantes, set bounds to your drink, not forgetting to eat, for so
without other medicine you will do well.’ ‘That many have told me,’
answered I, ‘but I can no more give up drinking for pleasure than if I
had been born for nothing else. My life is slipping away, and, by the
diary my

[Illustration: DON QUIXOTE AND SANCHO, ON THE ROAD TO TOBOSO.

_Paris, 1868._

_59th Edition._]

pulse is keeping, which at the latest will end its reckoning this coming
Sunday, I have to close my life’s account. Your worship has come to know
me in a rude moment, since there is no time for me to show my gratitude
for the goodwill you have shown me.’”

In a letter to his “very illustrious lord,” the Archbishop of Toledo,
dated 26th March, 1616, Cervantes wrote: “If for the malady which
affects me there could be any relief, the repeated marks of favour and
protection which your illustrious person bestows on me would be
sufficient to relieve me: but, indeed, it increases so greatly that I
think it will make an end of me, although not of my gratitude.” In his
valedictory dedication to the Conde de Lemos he speaks of himself as
“with one foot in the stirrup, waiting the call of death.” “Yesterday,”
he continues, “they gave me extreme unction, and to-day I am writing.
The time is short, my agonies increase; my hopes diminish.” And then
comes his brave, blithesome, parting message: “Good-bye, humours;
good-bye, pleasant fancies; good-bye, merry friends; for I perceive I am
dying, in the wish to see you happy in the other life.”

This was his last greeting to his patron, and to the world that had
learned to love him so well. His dedication is dated 19th April, and on
23rd April, 1616--nominally on the same day that Shakespeare died--the
illustrious Spaniard heard the summons of Death, and passed into the
great beyond. He was buried as a member of the Franciscan Order in the
graveyard of the Convent in the Calle del Humilladero, to which his
daughter Isabel shortly afterwards retired. No stone marked the place
where the body of Cervantes was laid, but we know that his widow, his
daughters, and the other members of his family were laid to rest in the
same hallowed ground, and that in 1635, when the Trinitarian sisters
removed themselves to the Calle de Cantaranas, the remains of the
departed members of their Order were collected into a common heap and
carried by the sisterhood to their new Convent. The manuscripts, the
pictures, even the bones of the author of _Don Quixote_ are thus lost to
the knowledge of the world. But the man lives again to-day in the
commendations of his generals, in the testimony of his brothers-in-arms,
in the evidence of his devoted fellow-captives in Algeria, and in his
own modest biographical memoranda. We recognise him in the brilliant
description of him that has been penned by the Spanish biographer,
Aribau, as the man who “passed through the world as a stranger whose
language was not understood,” announcing “the dawn of a civilisation
which broke long afterwards.”

But even as Cervantes has given us the best picture of himself, he has
given us also the best epithet that has ever been penned concerning him.
He was thinking not of himself, but of Chrysostom, when he uttered the
eulogy in which we may apostrophise the body of Cervantes: “This body
...

[Illustration: DEATH OF DON QUIXOTE.

_Paris, 1858._

_60th Edition._]

was one enlivened by a soul which Heaven had enriched with the greatest
part of its most valuable graces ... who was unrivalled in wit,
matchless in courteousness, a phœnix in friendship ... prudent and grave
without pride, modest without affectation, pleasant and complaisant
without meanness; in a word, the first in everything good, though second
to none in misfortune.”




THE PROVERBS OF CERVANTES.


It has been declared, without provoking contradiction, that Spanish
proverbs are undoubtedly wiser and wittier, as well as more numerous
than those of any other language. At least a dozen collections of these
tabloids of wisdom have been published in Spain; the largest, which was
compiled by Juan de Yriarte, containing no fewer than 24,000 proverbs.
At least half-a-dozen volumes were in existence in the time of
Cervantes; and from these sources it may be presumed he went for much of
the sage and pointed witticisms with which Sancho Panza garnishes his
conversation. Though it was not the purpose of the author of _Don
Quixote_ to select the most characteristic and representative specimens
in the language, he has brought together in his book some 300 examples
of the _refranes_ which were then in current use; and from those which
he considered worthy of quotation I have made the following selection:

     “The devil lurks behind the cross.”--I. 6; II. 33, 47.


     “What is good is never too abundant.”--I. 6.

     “Many go for wool, and come back shorn.”--I. 7; II. 14, 43, 67.

     “One swallow does not make a summer.”--I. 13.

     “There is no recollection which time does not obliterate, nor grief
     which death does not destroy.”--I. 15.

     “There is nothing certain in this life.”--I. 15.

     “What hath been, hath been.”--I. 20.

     “All will come out in the washing.”--I. 20, 22; II. 36.

     “Do not ask as a favour what you can obtain by force.”--I. 21.

     “When one door is shut, another is opened.”--I. 21.

     “Let him be wretched who thinks himself so.”--I. 21.

     “No discourse that is long can be pleasing.”--I. 21.

     “Man goes as God is pleased.”--I. 22.

     He who sings frightens away his ills.”--I. 22.

     “‘No’ contains the same number of letters as ‘Ay.’”--I. 22.

     “To do good to low fellows is to throw water into the sea.”--I. 23.

     “The absent feel and fear every ill.”--I. 25.

     “Many think to find bacon where there are not even hooks to hang it
     on.”--I. 25; II. 55, 65, 73.

     “He who does not intend to pay is not troubled in making his
     bargain.”--I. 28.

     “The danger is generally in the delay.”--I. 29, 46; II. 41, 71.

     “A bird in the hand is better than an eagle on the wing.”--I. 31;
     II. 12, 71.

     “We must suit our behaviour to the occasion.”--I. 31; II. 3.

     “To know where the shoe pinches.”--I. 32.

     “You often find a good drinker under a bad cloak.”--I. 33.

     “He who gives quickly, gives twice.”--I. 34.

     “There is a great distance between said and done.”--I. 46.

     “Diligence is the mother of success.”--I. 46.

     “Every one is the son of his own works.”--I. 47.

     “Since I am a man, I may come to be Pope.”--I. 47.

     “When the head aches, all the members feel it.”--II. 2.

     “Honours change manners.”--II. 4.

     “Everyone is as God has made him, and very often worse.”--II. 4.

     “He who covers thee, discovers thee.”--II. 5.

     “The virtuous maid and the broken leg must stay at home.”--II. 5,
     49.

     “Better a daughter ill-married than well kept.”--II. 5.

     “Great deeds are reserved for great men.”--II. 5.

     “He who cannot take advantage of fortune when it comes, should not
     complain if it passes him by.”--II. 5.

     “The counsel of a woman is not worth much, but he who does not take
     it is worth nothing.”--II. 7.

     “Many littles makes much.”--II. 7.

     “He who shuffles the cards does not cut them.”--II. 7.

     “The lamb goes (to the butcher) as soon as the sheep.”--II. 7.

     “Tell me with whom you live, and I will tell you what you
     are.”--II. 9.

     “Truth always gets above falsehood, as oil above water.”--II. 9.

     “Not with whom thou art bred, but with whom thou art fed.”--II. 10,
     32, 68.

     “Madness must necessarily have more followers than
     discretion.”--II. 13.

     “Those who seek adventures do not always find happy ones.”--II. 13.

     “It is other people’s burdens that kill the ass.”--II. 13.

     “If the blind lead the blind, both are in danger of falling into
     the ditch.”--II. 13.

     “There is no road so level as to have no rough places.”--II. 13.

     “To know how many three and two make.--II. 13, 36.

     “The lance never blunted the pen, nor the pen the lance.”--II. 16.

     “Between a woman’s Yes and No I would not venture to stick the
     point of a pin.”--II. 19.

     “For God who sends the wounds, sends the cure.”--II. 19.

     “Love looks through spectacles which make copper appear gold,
     riches poverty, and weak eyes distil pearls.”--II. 19.

     “Every sheep with his fellow.”--II. 19.

     “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.”--II. 20.

     “Let him preach well who lives well.”--II. 20.

     “He who does not rise with the sun, does not enjoy the day.”--II.
     23.

     “He who errs and repents recommends himself to God.”--II. 28.

     “To talk of a rope in the house of one who has been hanged.”--II.
     28.

     “Where you least expect it up starts the hare.”--II. 30.

     “He who lives a long life, must needs go through many evils.”--II.
     32.

     “Associate with good men and thou wilt be one of them.”--II. 32.

     “The little birds have God for a caterer.”--II. 33.

     All is not gold that glitters.”--II. 33.

     “Four yards of Cuenca cloth keep one warmer than as many of fine
     Segovia serge.”--II. 33.

     To begin an affair is to have it half finished.”--II. 33.

     “At night all cats are grey.”--II. 33.

     “Nobody is born learned; and (even) bishops are made of men.”--II.
     33.

     “I am an old dog, and ‘tus, tus,’ will not do for me.”--II. 33, 69.

     “A good name is better than great riches.”--II. 33.

     “The corpse of the Pope takes no more ground than that of the
     sacristan.”--II. 33.

     “The fire gives light, and the flames brightness, and yet they may
     both destroy us.”--II. 34.

     “We make less account of that which costs us little.”--II. 34.

     “A good heart overcomes evil fortune.--II. 35.

     “The ass laden with gold mounts lightly up the hill.”--II. 35.

     “There is nothing that costs less than civility.”--II. 36.

     “There is no avenging yourself upon a rich man.”--II. 37.

     “You may lose as well by a card too much as by a card too
     little.”--II. 37.

     “Make yourself into honey and the flies will devour you.”--II. 43,
     49.

     “To ‘Get out of my house!’ and ‘What do you want with my wife?’
     there is no answer.”--II. 43.

     “We are all equals when we are asleep.”--II. 43.

     “The foolish sayings of the rich man pass for saws in
     society.”--II. 43.

     “As much as you have, so much you are worth.”--II. 43.

     “Heaven always favours good desires.”--II. 43.

     “To whom God wishes well, his house knows it.”--II. 43.

     “There can be no true pleasantry without discretion.”--II. 44.

     “We do not know what is good until we have lost it.”--II. 48.

     “It is better for him whom God helps than for him who always rises
     early.”--II. 49.

     “She who desires to see, desires also to be seen.”--II. 49.

     “When God sends the dawn, He sends it for all.”--II. 49.

     “As long as I am warm, let them laugh (who will).”--II. 50.

     “Ingratitude is the child of pride.”--II. 51.

     “When you are at Rome, do as you see.”--II. 54.

     “Man proposes and God disposes.”--II. 55.

     “Until death, all is life.”--II. 59.

     “He who falls to-day, may rise to-morrow.”--II. 65.

     “Said the pot to the kettle, ‘Get away, blackface!’”--II. 67.

     “What the eyes see not, breaks not the heart.”--II. 67.

     “The righteous sometimes suffer for sinners.”--II. 67.

     “Do away with the motive, and you do away with the sin.”--II. 67.

     “He who rails is not far from forgiving.”--II. 70.




CHRONOLOGICAL REPERTOIRE OF DOCUMENTS RELATING TO THE LIFE OF CERVANTES.


------------+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------
 DATE.      |  PLACE.   |            DOCUMENTS.               |   First
            |           |                                     | Publisher.
------------+-----------+-------------------------------------+------------------
1547,       | Alcala de | Baptismal certificate of Miguel     |
October 9   | Henares   | de Cervantes                        | Montiano
            |           |                                     |
1569        | Madrid    | “Stanzas on the death of H.M.”      |
            |           | (Account of ... funeral of          | Juan Lopez
            |           | Queen Isabella of Valois)           | de Hoyos
            |           |                                     |
1572,       | Sicily    | Delivery of three escudos to        | Navarrete
April 29    |           | Cervantes, in the Third             |
            |           | Figueroa                            |
            |           |                                     |
1573 and    | Naples    | Deliveries to Cervantes, soldier    |
1574        |           | in the company of Ponce de          |
            |           | Léon                                | Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1576,       | Madrid    | Amplification of the information    |
Nov. 9      |           | relating to the captivity of        |
            |           | Rodrigo and Miguel de               |
            |           | Cervantes, requested by their       |
            |           | father (No. 12)                     | Perez Pastor
            |           |                                     |
1576,       | Madrid    | Royal letters patent granting to    |
Dec. 6      |           | Dona Leonor sixty escudos to        | Spanish
            |           | assist in ransoming her son         | Academy
            |           |                                     |
1577        | Algiers   | Letter, in triplets, from Cervantes |
            |           |  to Mateo Vazquez                   | Moran
            |           |                                     |
1578,       | Madrid    | Inquiry requested by Rodrigo        |
March 17    |           | de Cervantes, concerning the        |
            |           | services of his son Miguel          | Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1578,       | Madrid    | Undertaking of Rodrigo de           |
June 9      |           | Cervantes, Dona Leonor de           |
            |           | Cortinas and Dona Magdalena         |
            |           | P. de S., their daughter, to        |
            |           | pay to Hernandode Torres all        |
            |           | that the ransom of Miguel de        |
            |           | Cervantes might cost above          |
            |           | the 200 ducats that Dona            |
            |           | Andrea de Cervantes had             |
            |           | undertaken, and 1,077 reals         |
            |           | which the authorisers had           |
            |           | already paid (No. 15)               | Perez Pastor
            |           |                                     |
1578,       | Madrid    | Certification by the Duke of Sesa   |
July 25     |           | of the services of Cervantes        | Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1579,       | Madrid    | Memorial of Dona Leonor to the      |
March 29    |           | Council of Cruzada, relating        | Spanish
            |           | to her son’s ransom                 | Academy
            |           |                                     |
1579,       | Madrid    | Receipt for 300 ducats handed       |
July 31     |           | by Dona Leonor and Dona             |
            |           | Andrea to Fr. Juan Gil and          |
            |           | Fr. Anton de la Bella to aid        |
            |           | in the ransom of Cervantes          | Pellicer
            |           |                                     |
1579,       | Madrid    | Royal letters patent postponing     |
August 19   |           | the permission given to Dona        | Review
            |           | Leonor to take out goods            | Archives
            |           |                                     |
1580,       | Madrid    | Royal letters patent allowing       |
Jan. 17     |           | Dona Leonor to take goods           |
            |           | from Valencia to Algiers to         |
            |           | assist the rescue of her son        |
            |           | Miguel                              |
            |           |                                     |
1580,       | Algiers   | Certificate of ransom of Miguel     |
Sept. 19    |           | de Cervantes, native of Alcala      |
            |           | de Henares ... son of               |
            |           | Rodrigo de Cervantes and            |
            |           | Dona Leonor de Cortinas, and        |
            |           | a resident of Madrid                | Flores
            |           |                                     |
1580,       | Algiers   | Judicial inquiry in Algiers before  |
Oct. 10     |           | Fr. Juan Gil, with witnesses        |
            |           | testifying to the noble and         |
            |           | heroic behaviour of Cervantes       |
            |           | during his captivity                | Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1580,       | Madrid    | Inquiry into the captivity of       |
Dec. 1      |           | Miguel de Cervantes, requested      |
            |           | by his father, Rodrigo              |
            |           | de Cervantes                        | Perez Pastor
            |           |                                     |
1580,       | Madrid    | Inquiry into the captivity of       |
Dec. 18     |           | Cervantes, at his own request,      |
            |           | autograph                           | Perez Pastor
            |           |                                     |
1580,       | Madrid    | Declaration of Cervantes given      |
Dec. 19     |           | at the judicial inquiry into        |
            |           | the captivity of Rodrigo de         |
            |           | Chabes                              | Perez Pastor
            |           |                                     |
1581,       | Algiers   | Attestation of the steps taken      |
March 5     |           | for the ransom of the captives      | Perez Pastor
            |           |                                     |
1581,       | Fomar     | Delivery of 100 escudos to          |
May 21      |           | Cervantes by Philip II. for         |
            |           | his military services               | Moran
            |           |                                     |
1582        | Paris     | Mention of the ransom of 186        |
            |           | captives, among them                | Spanish
            |           | Cervantes                           | Academy
            |           |                                     |
1584,       |           | Letters of Sanctoyo to Mateo        |
April       |           | Vazquiez, recommending the
            |           | Lic. Cervantes                      | Gayangos
            |           |                                     |
1584,       | Esquívias | Certificate of marriage of          |
Dec. 12     |           | Cervantes with Dona Catalina        | Vicente de
            |           | de Palacios                         | los Rios
            |           |                                     |
1585,       | Esquívias | Certificate of baptism of Isabella  |
March 30    |           | Chiticalla                          | Foronda
            |           |                                     |
1585,       | Madrid    | Arrangement of Rodrigo de           |
Sept. 10    |           | Cervantes and his sister, Dona      |
            |           | Magdalena de Cervantes, with        |
            |           | Napoleon Lomelin, in regard         |
            |           | to some taffeta stuff pledged       |
            |           | by M. de Cervantes, her             |
            |           | brother (No. 25)                    | Perez Pastor
            |           |                                     |
1585,       | Madrid    | Receipt of Miguel de Cervantes      |
Dec. 30     |           | to Diego de Alburquerque and        |
            |           | Miguel Angel Lombrias (No. 26)      | Perez Pastor
            |           |                                     |
1586,       | Esquívias | Deed of settlement granted by       |
August 9    |           |   Cervantes to his wife             | Pellicer
            |           |                                     |
1586,       | Esquívias | Power of attorney granted to        |
August 9    |           |   Cervantes by his mother-in-law    | Foronda
            |           |                                     |
1587        | Seville   | Receipt from paymaster, which       |
            |           |   shows that Cervantes was          |
            |           |   collecting wheat commissioned     |
            |           |   by Valdivia                       | Moran
            |           |                                     |
1588,       | Seville   | First commission conferred on       |
Jan. 22     |           |   Cervantes by Antonio de           |
            |           |   Guevara                           | Moran
            |           |                                     |
1588,       | Seville   | Power of attorney authorised        |
Feb. 24     |           |   by Cervantes to Francisco de      |
            |           |   Silva to petition for the         |
            |           |   absolution of the excommunication |
            |           |   of Ecija                          | Asensio
            |           |                                     |
1588,       | Seville   | Security authorised by J.           |
June 12     |           |   Cabeza de Vaca in favour          |
            |           |   of Cervantes, commissary of       |
            |           |   Guevara                           | Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1588,       | Seville   | Second commission conferred by      |
June 15     |           |   Guevara on Cervantes              | Moran
            |           |                                     |
1588,       | Seville   | Various accounts of Cervantes,      |
June and    |           |   and payments made to him          |
December    |           |   for his collecting in Ecija,      |
            |           |   Marchena, &c.                     | Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1588,       | Seville   | Commission warrant issued by        |
July 9      |           |   Guevara in favour of Cervantes    |
            |           |   for collecting in Ecija           | Mainez
            |           |                                     |
1588,       | Seville   | Commission given by Guevara         |
Sept. 5     |           |   to Cervantes to take oil from     |
            |           |   Marchena                          | Moran
            |           |                                     |
1588,       | Seville   | Fresh commissions from              |
Oct. 17     |           |   Guevara to Cervantes, to take     |
  and 20    |           |   corn and 2,500 arrobas more       |
            |           |   of oil from Ecija                 | Moran
            |           |                                     |
1589,       | Seville   | Sworn account given by Cervantes    |
Feb. 6      |           |   of the expenses for               |
            |           |   grinding in Ecija                 | Guardia
            |           |                                     |
1589,       | Seville   | Liquidation of accounts presented   |
April 2     |           |   by Cervantes, and                 |
            |           |   signed receipt                    |  Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1589,       | Seville   | Power of attorney authorised        |
June 26     |           |   by Cervantes in favour of         |
            |           |   M. Sta. Maria for suits and       |
            |           |   payments                          | Asensio
            |           |                                     |
1589,       | Seville   | Close of account of Cervantes       |
June 26     |           |   with Tomas Gutierrez              | Asensio
            |           |                                     |
1590,       | Carmona   | Petition of Cervantes to the        |
Feb. 12     |           |   Council of Carmona for permission |
            |           |   to take away oil                  | P. Fita
            |           |                                     |
1590,       | Seville   | Commission conferred by             |
March 23    |           |   Miguel de Oviedo on Cervantes     |
            |           |   for collections in                |
            |           |   Carmona                           | Moran
            |           |                                     |
1590,       | Seville   | Receipt                             |
March 27    |           |   authorised by Cervantes           |
            |           |   to Diego de Zufre                 | Asensio
            |           |                                     |
1590,       | Madrid    | Memorial presented by Cervantes     |
May 21      |           |   to the King, enumerating          |
            |           |   services rendered, and            |
            |           |   asking for a post in the Indies.  |
            |           |   The decree respecting this        |
            |           |   memorial, given on June 6,        |
            |           |   says: “Let him look for           |
            |           |   something in which the            |
            |           |   favour may be made.”              | Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1590,       | Seville   | Sworn account, presented by         |
August 27   |           |   Cervantes, of the wheat, &c.,     |
            |           |   he received in 1587-88-89, by     |
            |           |   commission from Valdivia and      |
            |           |   Guevara                           | Moran
            |           |                                     |
1591,       | Seville   | Sworn accounts, presented by        |
April 2 &   |           |   Cervantes, of the oil collected   |
  Oct. 20   |           |   by order of Guevara               | Moran
            |           |                                     |
1591,       | Estepa    | Decree of the Council of Estepa,    |
Oct. 15     |           |   agreeing to hand to Cervantes     |
            |           |   wheat and barley for his          | Asensio to
            |           |   collections                       |       Apraiz
            |           |                                     |
1592,       | Pto. Sta. | Letter of Isunza to the King,       |
Jan. 7      |  Maria    |   assuring him that Cervantes       |
            |           |   was a man of honour, and          |
            |           |   worthy of confidence              | Apraiz
            |           |                                     |
            |           |                                     |
1592,       | Estepa    | Session of the Council of Estepa    |
Jan. 9      |           |   to hand wheat to Benito,          | Asensio to
            |           |   assistant to Cervantes            |       Apraiz
            |           |                                     |
1592,       | Seville   | Power of attorney from Cervantes    |
June 27     |           |   to the Ruy Saez for               | Asensio to
            |           |   receiving wages from Isunza       |       Apraiz
            |           |                                     |
1592,       | Seville   | Receipt authorised by Cervantes     |
July 14     |           |   to Ruy Saez.                      | Asensio
            |           |                                     |
            |           |                                     |
1592,       | Seville   | Security of Cervantes, by J.        |
August 5    |           |   Fortuni                           | Asensio
            |           |                                     |
1592,       | Seville   | Document in which Cervantes         |
August 5    |           |   acquired the wheat and barley     |
            |           |   previously in the hands of        |
            |           |   Salvador Foro, removed from       |
            |           |   Feba in 1591 by his assistant,    |
            |           |   Benito                            | Asensio
            |           |                                     |
1592,       | Seville   | Certificate of Cervantes _re_       |
August 8    |           |   same                              | Apraiz
            |           |                                     |
1592,       | Seville   | Contract with Osorio for composing  |
Sept. 19    |           |   six comedies                      | Asensio
            |           |                                     |
1592,       | Ecija     | Francisco Mascoso, Mayor of         |
Sept. 19    |           |   Ecija, Judge of Commissaries,     |
            |           |   commands Cervantes to             |
            |           |   restore 300 fanegas of wheat,     |
            |           |   which he was supposed to          |
            |           |   have sold without being ordered   |
            |           |   to do so                          | Moran
            |           |                                     |
1592,       | Madrid    | Memorial of Cervantes to prevent    |
Dec. 1      |           |   Isunza from being                 |
            |           |   molested, Fora having asked       |
            |           |   for the seizure of his goods      | Moran
            |           |                                     |
1593,       | Seville   | The Auditors order Cervantes        |
Jan. 4      |           |   to give an account of what        |
            |           |   Benito had collected              | Moran
            |           |                                     |
1593,       | Seville   | Sworn statement of oil collected    | Moran
Jan. 17     |           |                                     |
1593,       | Seville   | Commission conferred by Oviedo,     |
July 7      |           |   the Purveyor, on Cervantes,       |
            |           |   which he executed in              |
            |           |   Seville, Llerena, Villagarcia,    |
            |           |   and other places                  |
            |           |                                     |
1593,       | Seville   | Receipt authorised by Cervantes     |
July 8      |           |   to Andrés Cerio                   | Asensio
            |           |                                     |
1593,       | Seville   | Power of Attorney authorised        |
July 12     |           |   by Cervantes in favour of         |
            |           |   Juan de Salinas                   | Asensio
            |           |                                     |
1593,       | Seville   | Another commission conferred        |
August 19   |           |   by Oviedo on Cervantes            | Moran
            |           |                                     |
1594,       | Madrid    | Appearance of Cervantes presenting  |
July 1      |           |   Francisco de Gasco                |
            |           |   as security for his commission    |
            |           |   of storehouses and excise in      |
            |           |   the kingdom of Granada            | Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1594,       | Madrid    | Security authorised by Gasco        | Navarrete
August 1    |           |                                     |
            |           |                                     |
1594,       | Madrid    | Cervantes asks that Gasco’s         |
August 20   |           |   security be taken as sufficient   | Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1594,       | Madrid    | Undertaking authorised by Cervantes | Navarrete
August 21   |           |   and his wife that their           |
            |           |   persons and effects shall be      |
            |           |   responsible for his payments      |
            |           |   of excise                         |
            |           |                                     |
1594,       | Madrid    | Royal letters patent commissioning  |
August 23   |           |   Cervantes to collect              |
            |           |   the thirds and excise             | Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1594,       | Baza      | Execution put in by Cervantes       |
Sept. 9     |           |   in Baza                           | Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1594,       | Malaga    | Letter of Cervantes to the King     |
Nov. 17     |           |   giving an account of receipts in  |
            |           |   Baza, Guadix, &c., and asking for |
            |           |   twenty days’ extension in which   |
            |           |   to collect the remainder          |
            |           |   autograph                         | Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1594,       | Madrid    | Royal decree in reply to a letter   |
Nov. 29     |           |   of Cervantes on 8th Oct., in      |
            |           |   which he gave his reasons for not |
            |           |   collecting excise at Almunecar,   |
            |           |   Motril, and Solobrena             | Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1594,       | Ronda     | Attestation by the notary,          |
Dec. 9      |           |   Sebastian de Montalban, of        |
            |           |   payments received by Cervantes    | Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1594,       | Seville   | Receipt authorised by Cervantes to  |
Dec. 15     |           |   J. Leclercque                     | Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1595,       | Madrid    | Royal decree to the judge at        |
August 7    |           |   Olmedillas de Sevilla for him to  |
            |           |   take goods in lieu of payment by  |
            |           |   the bankrupt Simon Freire of the  |
            |           |   7,400 reals which Cervantes had   |
            |           |   handed him                        | Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1597,       | Madrid    | Royal decree, addressed to Seville, |
Sept. 6     |           |   ordering Cervantes to give        |
            |           |   securities for his appearance in  |
            |           |   Madrid within twenty days         | Navarrete
            |           |                                     |
1597,       | Madrid    | Royal decree to Judge Vallejo, of   |
Dec. 1      |           |   Seville, ordering that “on        |
            |           |   Cervantes giving legal securities |
            |           |   ... he be set free from the       |
            |           |   prison where he lies,” in order   |
            |           |   to go to court and submit         |
            |           |   accounts of what he owed          | Navarrete
            |            |                                     |
1598,       | Madrid     | Anastro is charged by the Auditors  |
March 31    |            |   to give information of            |
            |            |   monies received by Cervantes      |
            |            |   in 1591 and ’92, when he was      |
            |            |   Isunza’s commissary               | Navarrete
            |            |                                     |
1598,       | Seville    | Sworn statement of collections      |
April 28    |            |   in Feba, Foro being in charge     | Navarrete
            |            |                                     |
1599,       | Madrid     | Guardianship of Isabel de           |
August 9    |            |   Saavedra given to Bartolomé       |
            |            |   de Forres (No. 36)                | Perez Pastor
            |            |                                     |
1599,       |            | Contract of Isabel de Saavedra      |
August 11   |            |   to serve in the house of Dona     |
            |            |   Magdalena de Sotomayor            |
            |            |   (No. 37)                          | Perez Pastor
            |            |                                     |
1600,       | Seville    | Document of which Cervantes         |
May 2       |            |   was a witness                     | Asensio
            |            |                                     |
1601,       | Valladolid | Statement made by auditors of       |
Sept. 13    |            |   accounts relating to the receipt  |
            |            |   of the 7,400 reals which          |
            |            |   Cervantes had handed to           |
            |            |   Simon Freire                      | Navarrete
            |            |                                     |
1603,       | Valladolid | Statement of auditors regarding     |
Jan. 24     |            |   the sum owing by Cervantes        | Navarrete
            |            |                                     |
1603,       | Valladolid | Receipt written (?) by Cervantes,   |
Feb. 8      |            |   signed by his sister, Dona        |
            |            |   Andrea, for import of work        |
            |            |   she had done for the Marquis      |
            |            |   of Villafranca                    | Navarrete
            |            |                                     |
1604,       | Madrid     | Settlement of the book of the       |
May 26      |            |   Hermandad de Impresores,          |
            |            |   Printers’ Brotherhood, which      |
            |            |   shows that on that date two       |
            |            |   “Quixotes” had been received      | Perez Pastor
            |            |                                     |
1605,       | Valladolid | Power of attorney from Cervantes    |
April 2     |            |   to Francisco de Robles            |
            |            |   and two residents of Lisbon       |
            |            |   that they may take action         |
            |            |   “against any persons in           |
            |            |   Lisbon who may have printed,      |
            |            |   or desire to print Quixote.”      | Perez Pastor
            |            |                                     |
1605,       |            | Proceedings in Valladolid in        |
June 27     |            |   connection with the death of      |
            |            |   Don Caspar de Ezpeleta            | Pellicer
            |            |                                     |
1607,       | Madrid     | Inventory of effects of Francisco   |
Nov. 23     |            |   de Robles, in which is            |
            |            |   included a slip relating to a     |
            |            |   loan of 450 reals to Miguel       |
            |            |   de Cervantes (No. 40)             | Perez Pastor
            |            |                                     |
            |            |                                     |
1608,       | Madrid     | Marriage contract between           |
August 28   |            |   Isabel de Cervantes and Luis      | Archives
            |            |   de Molina                         |     Review
            |            |                                     |
1608,       | Madrid     | Action against Cervantes and        |
Nov. 6      |            |   Gasco to extort accounts          | Navarrete
            |            |                                     |
1608,       | Madrid     | Receipt for part of the dowry of    |
Dec. 8      |            |   Isabel de Cervantes, authorised   |
            |            |   by Luis de Molina                 |
            |            |   (No. 42)                          | Perez Pastor
            |            |                                     |
1609,       | Madrid     | Nuptial benediction of Isabel       |
March 1     |            |   de Cervantes (No. 43)             | Perez Pastor
            |            |                                     |
1609,       | Madrid     | Reception of Cervantes as “a        |
April 17    |            |   slave of the Holy Sacrament”      |
            |            |   in the brotherhood of that        |
            |            |   name                              | Navarrete
            |            |                                     |
1609,       | Madrid     | Dona Andrea de Cervantes and        |
June 8      |            |   Dona Catalina de Salazar          |
            |            |   take the veil in the Third        |
            |            |   Order of S. Francisco             | Pellicer
            |            |                                     |
1609,       | Madrid     | Death certificate of Dona           |
October 9   |            |   Andreadde Cervantes in the        |
            |            |   parish of S. Sebastian, Madrid    | Pellicer
            |            |                                       |
1610,       | Madrid     | Dona Catalina takes the vow in        |
June 16     |            |   the Third Order of S. Francisco     | Pellicer
            |            |                                       |
1610,       | Madrid     | Will of Dona Catalina de              |
June 16     |            |   Salazar Vozmediano, wife of         |
            |            |   Cervantes (No. 44)                  | Perez Pastor
            |            |                                       |
1611,       | Madrid     | Death certificate of Dona Magdalena   |
Jan. 28     |            |   de Jésus, sister of                 | Francisco
            |            |   Cervantes, in the parish of         |  Asenjo
            |            |   S. Sebastian                        |  Barbieri
            |            |                                       |
1611,       | Madrid     | Receipt authorised by Luis de         |
Nov. 29     |            |   Molina for 36,753 reals received    |
            |            |   from Cervantes and                  |
            |            |   J. de Urbina as part of the         |
            |            |   dowry of his wife, Isabel de        |
            |            |   Saavedra (No. 45)                   | Perez Pastor
            |            |                                       |
1613,       | Madrid     | Rights of the “Original               |
Sept. 9     |            |   Novels” ceded by the author         |
            |            |   to Francisco de Robles              |
            |            |   (No. 47)                            | Perez Pastor
            |            |                                       |
1613,       | Madrid     | Power of attorney from Francisco      |
Sept. 28    |            |   de Robles to Geraldo ...            |
            |            |   to take action against any          |
            |            |   who in Zaragoza had printed,        |
            |            |   or desired to print, the            |
            |            |   “Original Novels” (No. 48)          | Perez Pastor
            |            |                                       |
1615,       | Madrid     | Annotation in the Printers’           |
Nov. 1      |            |   Brotherhood book of two             |
            |            |   copies of chapters(?) of the        |
            |            |   “Comedies of Cervantes,”            |
            |            |   received from Alonso Martin         |
            |            |   (No. 52)                            | Perez Pastor
            |            |                                       |
1616,       | Madrid     | Letter of Cervantes to the Archbishop |
March 26    |            |   of Toledo, Autograph                | La Barrera
            |            |                                       |
1616,       | Madrid     | Vow of Cervantes in the Third         |
April 2     |            |   Order of S. Francisco               | Pellicer
            |            |                                       |
1616,       | Madrid     | Death certificate of Cervantes,       |
April 23    |            |   in the parish of S. Sebastian,      |
            |            |   Madrid                              | Nasarre
            |            |                                       |
1617,       | Madrid     | Annotation in the Printers’           |
April 2     |            |   Brotherhood book of two             |
            |            |   copies of chapters (?) of “The      |
            |            |   Works of Persiles,” received        |
            |            |   from Juan de la Cuesta              |
            |            |   (No. 53)                            | Perez Pastor
            |            |                                       |
------------+------------+---------------------------------------+------------------




BIBLIOGRAPHY OF DON QUIXOTE.


EDITIONS IN SPANISH.


FIRST PART.

     1. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1605.
     4to. [Registered in the “Colegio de la Madre de Dios ...
     Universidad de Alcala,” ... 1st December, 1604. “Por Juan de la
     Cuesta.”]

     2. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Lisbon, 1605.
     4to. (Registered 26th February, 1605.)

     3. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Lisbon, MDCV.
     8vo. (Licensed 27th March, 1605.)

     4. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1605.
     4to. (With privilege.)

     5. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Valencia, 1605.
     8vo. (18th July.)

     6. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Valencia, 1605.
     8vo.

     7. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Brussels, 1607.
     8vo.

     8. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1608.
     4to.

     9. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1610.
     8vo.

     10. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Brucelas, 1611.
     8vo.

     11. Primera parte del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Brucelas, 1617. 8vo.


SECOND PART.

     12. Segunda Parte del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Madrid, 1615. 4to.

     13. Segunda Parte del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Brucelas, 1616. 8vo.

     14. Segunda Parte del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Valencia, 1616. 8vo.

     15. Segunda Parte del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Lisbon, 1617. 4to.


COMPLETE WORK.

     16. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Barcelona, 1617.

     Segunda Parte del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Barcelona, 1617. Two vols. 8vo.

     17. Primera y Segunda Parte del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la
     Mancha. Madrid, 1637. 4to.

     Segunda Parte del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Madrid, 1636. 4to.

     18. Primera y Segunda Parte del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la
     Mancha. Madrid, 1647. 4to.

     19. Parte Primera y Segunda del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la
     Mancha. Madrid, 1655. 4to.

     20. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Bruselas, 1662. Two vols. 8vo.

     21. Parte Primera y Segunda del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la
     Mancha. Madrid, 1662. 4to.

     22. Parte Primera y Segunda del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la
     Mancha. Madrid, 1668. Including Parte Segunda de el Ingenioso
     Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1662. 4to.

     23. Parte Primera y Segunda de Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la
     Mancha. Madrid, 1668. 4to.

     24. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Bruselas, 1671. Two vols. 8vo.

     25. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote. Amberes
     1673. Two vols. 8vo.

     26. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Parte Primera. Madrid, 1674. Two vols. 4to.

     Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote. Madrid,
     MDCLXXIV. Two vols. 4to.

     27. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Amberes, MDCXCVII. Two vols. 8vo.

     28. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Barcelona, 1704. 4to.

     29. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Madrid, 1706. Two vols. 4to.

     30. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Madrid, 1714. Two vols. 4to.

     31. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Amberes, MDCCXIX. Two vols. 8vo.

     32. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote. Madrid,
     1723. Two vols. 4to.

     33. Vida i Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote. Sevilla. Two
     vols. 4to. Dedication dated 1723. Madrid, licensed 1731. Confusion
     unexplained.

     34. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Madrid, 1730. Two vols. 4to.

     35. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Madrid, 1735. Two vols. 4to.

     36. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Leon de Francia, MDCCXXXVI. Two vols. 8vo.

     37. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Londres, MDCCXXXVIII. Four vols. Large 4to.

     38. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Madrid. Two vols. 4to.

     39. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Haia. Four vols. 8vo.

     40. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Madrid, 1750. Two vols. 4to.

     41. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Madrid, MDCCL. Two vols. 4to.

     42. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Madrid, MDCCLI. Two vols. 4to.

     43. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Barcelona. Four vols. 8vo. The date of this edition is in
     confusion. Apparently, it was expected to be issued in 1750, and
     was delayed until 1755.

     44. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Amsterdam and Lipsia, MDCCLV. Four vols. 8vo.

     45. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Tarragona, 1757. Four vols. 8vo.

     46. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Barcelona, 1762. Four vols. 8vo.

     47. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Madrid, 1764. Two vols. 4to.

     48. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Madrid, 1765. Four vols. 8vo.

     49. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Amberes, MDCCLXX. Four vols. 8vo.

     50. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Caballero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Madrid, MDCCLXXI. Four vols. 8vo.

     51. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Caballero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Madrid, MDCCLXXVII. Four vols. 8vo.

     52. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Caballero Don Quijote de la Mancha.
     Madrid, 1777. Four vols. 8vo.

     53. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Madrid,
     MDCCLXXX. Four vols. 4to.

     54. Historia del Famoso Cavallero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Londres, MDCCLXXXI. Three vols. 4to.

     55. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Madrid,
     MDCCLXXXII. Four vols. 8vo.

     56. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Caballero Don Quixote. Madrid,
     MDCCLXXXII. Four vols. 8vo.

     57. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote. Madrid, MDCCLXXXVII. Six
     vols. 8vo.

     58. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Madrid,
     MDCCXCVII. Six vols. 16mo.

     59. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Madrid,
     MDCCLXXXXVII. Five vols. 8vo.

     60. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Madrid,
     MDCCLXXXXVIII. Nine vols. 12mo.

     61. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Leipsique, 1800.
     Six vols. 12mo.

     62. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Caballero Don Quixote de la Mancha.

     Historia de Don Quixote de la Mancha.

     El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1804. Six
     vols. 8vo.

     [This edition has three title pages, and is perhaps part of an
     edition intended to comprise the whole of the works of Cervantes.]

     63. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Berlin, 1804-05.
     Six vols. 8vo.

     64. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Burdeos, 1804.
     Four vols. 8vo.

     65. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Caballero Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Madrid, 1808. Four vols. 8vo.

     66. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. London, 1808.
     Four vols. 12mo.

     67. Historia del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Barcelona, 1808. Six vols. Obl. 12mo.

     68. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Leon, 1810. Four
     vols. 8vo.

     69. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote. London, 1814. Four vols.
     12mo.

     70. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Paris and
     Londres, 1814. Seven vols. 12mo.

     71. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Burdeos, 1815.
     Four vols. 8vo.

     72. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Leipsique,
     MDCCCXVIII. Six vols. 16mo.

     73. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1819.
     Five vols. 8vo.

     74. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Paris, 1825.
     Four vols. 12mo.

     75. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Paris, 1825. Six
     vols. 16mo.

     76. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1826.
     Two vols. 8vo.

     77. Obras Escogidas de Miguel de Cervantes. Paris, 1826. 16mo. El
     Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha.

     [Six volumes are occupied by _Quijote_ of the ten which form the
     collection.]

     78. Obras Escogidas de Cervantes.--El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote
     de la Mancha. Paris, 1827. 16mo. [Reprint of the foregoing on much
     finer paper.]

     79. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Paris, 1827.
     32mo. Miniature edition.

     80. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Paris, 1827. Six
     vols. 12mo.

     81. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. To which is
     added:

     Obras Escogidas de Miguel de Cervantes. Madrid, 1829. Four vols.
     8vo.

     82. Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1829. Four vols. 8vo.

     83. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1831.
     Four vols. 16mo.

     84. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Zaragoza, 1831. Two vols.
     8vo.

     85. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Berlin, 1831.
     Six vols. 16mo.

     86. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1832.
     Four vols. 12mo.

     87. El Ingenioso Hidalgo, &c. Paris, 1832. Seven vols. 16mo.

     88. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Barcelona, 1832.
     Six vols. 32mo.

     89. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Paris, 1832. Two
     vols. 32mo.

     90. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Barcelona, 1832.
     Six vols. 8vo.

     91. Don Quijote de la Mancha. Mexico, 1833. Five vols. 8vo.

     92. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1833.
     Six vols. 4to.

     93. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Paris, 1835. 8vo.

     94. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Leipzig, 1836. 8vo.

     95. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Boston, 1836.
     Two vols. 8vo.

     96. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Zaragoza, 1837. Two vols.
     8vo.

     97. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Second Edition. Boston, 1837.
     Two vols. 8vo.

     98. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Paris,
     MDCCCXXXVIII. Four vols. 16mo.

     99. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Barcelona,
     MDCCCXXXIX. Two vols. 4to.

     100. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote ... Second edition.
     Barcelona, MDCCCXL. Two vols. 4to.

     101. Historia de la Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote
... Madrid, 1840. Four vols. 12mo.

     102. Don Quijote de la Mancha. With Life of the Author. Paris,
     1840. 8vo.

     103. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Barcelona,
     1841. Three vols. 12mo.

     104. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Boston, 1842.
     Two vols. 8vo.

     105. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Mexico,
     MDCCCXLII. Two vols. 4to.

     106. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Paris, 1844.
     4to.

     107. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Madrid, 1844. Four vols.
     12mo.

     108. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. New edition. Madrid, 1844.
     Two vols. 8vo.

     109. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Paris, 1844.
     12mo.

     110. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote ... Barcelona, 1845. Six
     vols. 16mo.

     111. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote ... Barcelona,
     1845-46. Three vols. 8vo.

     112. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Paris, 1845.
     8vo.

     113. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote ... Madrid, 1845. Two vols.
     8vo.

     114. Biblioteca de Autores Españoles. First vol.

     Works of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra. Madrid, 1846. 4to.

     115. El Injenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1847.
     4to.

     116. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote ... Barcelona, 1848. Two
     vols. 4to.

     117. Obras de Cervantes.... Madrid, 1849. 4to. [Second edition of
     Vol. I. of the Bibl. de Autores Españoles, published in 1846.]

     118. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1851.
     4to.

     119. Biblioteca Universal.--El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la
     Mancha. Madrid, 1851. Fol.

     120. Biblioteca de Autores Españoles.--Obras de Cervantes. Madrid,
     1851. 4to.

     121. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote.... Mexico, 1852-53. Two
     vols. 8vo.

     122. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1853.
     Four vols. 4to.

     123. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Nueva-York
     (Appleton), 1854. 12mo.

     124. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote.... Sevilla, 1854. Two vols.
     4to.

     125. Obras de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra. First vol.: Don
     Quijote. Paris, 1855. 8vo.

     126. Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1855. Two vols. 4to.

     127. El Quijote. Abbreviated text. Madrid, 1856. 8vo.

     128. Don Quijote de La Mancha ... Nueva-York (Appleton), 1857. 8vo.

     129. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Barcelona,
     1857. Two vols. 8vo.

     130. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1859.
     Two vols. 8vo. (Exact copy of preceding.)

     131. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Barcelona,
     1859. Two vols. Large folio.

     132. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote ... Paris (1860?). 12mo.

     133. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Nueva-York
     (Appleton), 1860. 8vo.

     134. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Leipzig, 1860.
     Two vols. 8vo.

     135. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Paris, 1861.
     8vo.

     135_a_. El Quijote. Second edition of abbreviated text. Madrid,
     1861. 8vo. See No. 127.

     136. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1862.
     Two vols. 8vo.

     137. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1862.
     Two vols. Folio.

     138. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Argamasilla de
     Alba, 1863. Four vols. 16mo. Printed in the house which had been
     the prison of Cervantes. This edition, edited by Hartzenbusch, is
     of the utmost value in comparing variations of the text from the
     editions published in the lifetime of Cervantes.

     139. Obras Completas de Cervantes ... El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don
     Quijote de la Mancha ... Argamasilla de Alba, 1863. Four vols. 4to.
     Edited by Hartzenbusch. Printed in the house where Cervantes was
     imprisoned.

     140. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Barcelona and
     Madrid, 1863. 4to.

     140_a_. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Valparaiso, 1863. 8vo.

     141. Obras de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra. Third Edition. Madrid,
     1864. 4to. This is a reprint of the edition of 1849. See No. 117.

     142. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Nueva-York (Appleton), 1864.
     8vo.

     143. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Paris, 1864.
     4to.

     144. Biblioteca Ilustrada ... El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de
     la Mancha. Madrid, 1864. 4to.

     145. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1865.
     4to. Fourth edition of preceding.

     146. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Barcelona,
     MDCCCLXV. Folio. Issued by the Literary Society “La Maravilla.”

     147. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Leipzig, 1866.
     Two vols. 8vo.

     148. El Quijote de los Niños ... Abreviado. Madrid, 1867. 8vo.

     149. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1868.
     Two vols. 4to.

     150. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Boston (De
     Vries), New York (Lockwood), 1868. Two vols. 12mo.

     151. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Mexico, 1868-69. Two vols.
     8vo.

     152. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Barcelona,
     1869. Two vols. 8vo.

     153. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Glasgow (Ogle),
     1871. 8vo.

     154. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. London (Cassell), 1871. 8vo.
     (Stereotype edition of the preceding.)

     155. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Valencia, 1872.
     Two vols. 8vo.

     156. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Nueva-York (Appleton), 1872.
     8vo.

     157. El Quijote de los Niños, Abreviado. &c. Fifth edition. Madrid,
     1873. 8vo. Reprint of No. 148.

     158. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote ... Paris, 1873. 8vo.

     159. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote ... London (Chatto and
     Windus), 1874. 8vo. (Copy of Glasgow edition, 1871.)

     160. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote ... Leipzig, 1874. Two vols.
     8vo. (Reprint of 1866 edition.)

     161. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote ... Paris, 1875. 4to.
     (Reprint of 1861 edition.)

     162. Biblioteca Ilustrada. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote.
     Madrid, 1875. 4to. (Though called _fifth_ edition, this is a
     reprint of 1865 edition.) See No. 145.

     163. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1875.
     8vo.

     164. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Illustrated
     with a map and magnificent engravings. Madrid, 1875. Two vols.
     Folio.

     165. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote ... Barcelona, 1876. Two
     vols. Folio.

     166. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Cadiz, 1877.
     Five vols. Typographical reproduction of the first editions of
     First and Second Parts, 1605-1615, with Life of Cervantes,
     Appendices, Notes, &c.

     167. El Ingenioso Hidalgo ... First Part. Madrid, 1877. 16mo. Forms
     part of _Biblioteca de la Infancia_. Part II. appeared in 1879, and
     other parts in 1884.

     168. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote ... Paris, 1878. 8vo.

     169. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha ... Barcelona,
     MDCCCLXXIX. Two vols. 4to.

     170. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote ... New York (Appleton),
     1879. 12mo. Reprinted from American edition of 1860.

     171. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Paris, 1879.
     12mo.

     172. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Barcelona,
     1879. Two vols. Folio. Second edition of that published in 1876.

     173. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Sevilla, 1879.
     16mo.

     174. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Barcelona. Two
     vols. Folio. Monumental edition.

     175. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote.... Madrid, 1879. 4to.
     _Sixth_ edition. See No. 162.

     176. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Published for
     the first time at Alcalá de Henares (birthplace of Cervantes).
     Alcalá de Henares, 1879. Four vols. 8vo.

     177. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha. Barcelona,
     MDCCCLXXX. Folio.

     178. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Barcelona,
     1880. Two vols. Folio. (Reprint of No. 172.)

     179. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1880.
     Two vols. 16mo.

     180. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Barcelona,
     MDCCCLXXX. Two vols. Folio. Magnificent edition. Superb chromos
     (46).

     181. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Barcelona,
     1881. (Reprint of No. 178.)

     182. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Barcelona,
     1881. 8vo.

     183. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Barcelona,
     1881. Two vols. 8vo.

     184. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Leipzig, 1882. Two vols.
     8vo. (Reprint from edition of 1874.)

     185. El Ingenioso Hidalgo, &c. (Re-issue of No. 181.)

     186. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote ... Paris, 1882. 12mo.
     (Reprint of No. 171.)

     187. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote ... Barcelona, 1883. Two
     vols. 8vo. (Reprint of No. 187.)

     188. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote ... Barcelona, 1884. Two
     vols. 8vo. (Reprint of No. 175.)

     189. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Valencia, 1884.
     4to. (Professing to be the text of first edition of 1605, &c., but
     with the text mutilated.)

     190. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Sevilla, 1884.
     (Madrid, printed 1879.) Two vols. 16mo.

     191. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Zaragoza, 1885.
     Four vols. 32mo. (Microscopic type.)

     191_a_. Don Quijote. Nueva-York (Appleton), 1885. 4to.

     191_b_. El Quijote ... Madrid, 1885. 8vo ... abreviado.

     192. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1886.
     Four vols. 16mo. (Appeared as a feuilleton.)

     193. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote ... 1887. 4to. (Re-issue of
     No. 175.)

     194. El Quijote de la juventud. Paris, 1887. 8vo. (Extracts for
     children.)

     195. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1887.
     Two vols. 8vo.

     196. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Barcelona,
     1888. Two vols. 8vo. Similar, but with many additions, to the
     octavo editions published at Barcelona in 1881, 1883, 1884.

     197. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. Madrid, 1887.
     Two vols. Folio.

     197_a_. Don Quijote ... Sevilla, 1889. Two vols.

     198. Facsimile of the First Edition of Don Quijote. Both parts. The
     first complete book produced by photo-typography, with notes by
     Hartzenbusch. Barcelona, 1871-1873. The production of these volumes
     in facsimile was justly regarded as a most notable achievement.

     199. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote. Barcelona, 1892-93. Two
     vols. 4to.

     200. Don Quijote. Valencia, 1892. Two vols. 8vo.

     201. Don Quijote. Madrid, 1893. 4to.

     202. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Madrid, 1894. Eight vols.
     8vo.

     203. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Barcelona, 1894. 8vo.

     204. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Barcelona, 1892-95. Six
     vols. 4to.

     205. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Barcelona, 1894-95. Folio.

     206. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Barcelona, 1895. 4to.

     207. El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote. Leipzig, 1887-94. Four vols.
     8vo.

     208. Vida y Hechos del Ingenioso Caballero Don Quixote.... Without
     date or place; considered to be a pirated edition of that issued at
     Madrid in 1730. 4to.


ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS OF DON QUIXOTE.

     1. The History of the Valorous and Wittie Knight-Errant, Don
     Quixote of the Mancha. Printed by William Standsby, for Ed. Blount
     and W. Barrett. 1612. 4to. Translated by Thomas Shelton. The first
     translation of the First Part of “Quixote.”

     1_a_. The History of Don Quichote. _The first part._ Printed for
     Ed. Blounte. Translated by Thomas Shelton. London, 1612. 4to.

     The Second Part of the History of the Valorous and Witty
     Knight-Errant, Don Quixote of the Mancha. London, 1620. 4to.

     2. The History of the Valorous and Witty Knight-Errant, Don Quixote
     of the Mancha. London, 1652. Second edition of Shelton.

     3. The History of the Valorous and Witty Knight-Errant, Don
     Quixote, of the Mancha. London, 1675. 4to.

     4. The History of the most Renowned Don Quixote of Mancha: And his
     Trusty Squire Sancho Pancha. Translated by J. Philips. London,
     1687. 4to.

     5. The Delightful Hystory of Don Quixot, the most Renowned Baron of
     Mancha ... Lond., 1689. 12mo. Translated by Philips.

     6. The much-esteemed History of Don Quixote De la Mancha. London,
     1699. 12mo. (An abbreviation.)

     7. The History of the most Ingenious Knight Don Quixote de la
     Mancha. London, 1700. Two vols. 8vo. Partly translated by Capt.
     John Stevens.

     8. The History of the Ever-renowned Knight Don Quixote. London
     (1700?). Two vols. 4to. First edition of the translation of Peter
     Motteux.

     9. The History of the Renown’d Don Quixote De la Mancha. Translated
     by Several Hands. London, 1700. Four vols. 12mo.

     10. The History of the most Ingenious Knight Don Quixote ... now
     revised by Capt. John Stevens. London, 1706. Two vols. 8vo.

     11. The History of the Renown’d Don Quichote. Translated by Peter
     Motteux. London, 1712. Four vols. 12mo.

     12. The History of the Renowned Don Quixote. Translated by Peter
     Motteux. London, 1719. Four vols. 12mo.

     13. The much-esteemed History of Don Quixote de la Mancha. Two
     parts. London, 1721. 12mo. (An abbreviation.)

     14. The most admirable and delightful History ... of Don Quixote de
     la Mancha. London, 1721. 12mo. (An abbreviation.)

     15. The ... Knight ... Don Quixote. London, 1721. 12mo. Catalogue
     of British Museum.

     16. The History of the Renowned Don Quixote ... Translated by
     Motteux. London, 1725. Four vols. 12mo.

     17. The History of the Valorous and Witty Knight-Errant Don Quixote
     of the Mancha. Translated by Shelton. London, 1731. Four vols.
     12mo.

     18. The History of the Renowned Don Quixote. Translated by P.
     Motteux. London, 1733. Four vols. 12mo.

     19. Don Quixote ... Translated by Shelton. London, 1740. Four vols.
     12mo.

     20. The Life and Exploits of ... Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Translated by Charles Jarvis, Esq. London, 1742. Two vols. 4to.

     21. The History of the Renowned Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Translated by P. Motteux. London, 1743. Four vols. 12mo.

     22. Don Quixote ... Translated by Jarvis. London, 1747. Four vols.
     12mo.

     22_a_. The Life of ... Don Quixote. Translated by C. Jarvis.
     Dublin, 1747. Four vols. 12mo.

     23. Don Quixote ... Translated by Motteux. Glasgow, 1747 or 1757.
     Four vols. 12mo.

     24. The Life and Exploits of ... Don Quixote ... Translated by C.
     Jarvis. London, 1749. Two vols. 8vo.

     25. The History of the Renowned Don Quixote ... Translated by the
     late P. Motteux. London, 1749. Four vols. 24mo.

     26. The History and Adventures of the Renowned Don Quixote.
     Translated by T. Smollet, M.D. London, 1755. Two vols. 4to.

     27. Don Quixote ... Translated by Jarvis. London, 1756. Two vols.
     4to.

     28. The History and Adventures of ... Don Quixote. Translated by
     Smollet. London, 1761. Two vols. 12mo.

     29. The History and Adventures of ... Don Quixote. Translated by
     Smollet. Dublin, 1765. Four vols. 12mo.

     30. The Life and Exploits of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis.
     London, 1756. Two vols. 4to.

     31. Don Quixote ... Revised by Ozell. Edinburgh, 1766. Four vols.
     12mo.

     32. The Life and Exploits of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis.
     London, 1766. Four vols. 12mo.

     33. The History of the Renowned Don Quixote de la Mancha.
     Translated by George Kelly, Esq. London, 1769. Four vols. 12mo.

     34. The History ... of the Renowned Don Quixote. Translated by
     Smollet. London, 1770. Four vols. 12mo.

     35. The History of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Motteux. Revised
     by Ozell. Glasgow, 1771. Four vols. 12mo.

     36. The History of ... Don Quixote. Translated by C. H. Wilmot,
     Esq. London (1774?). Two vols. 4to.

     37. The Principal Adventures of Don Quixote. (A reproduction of the
     drawings of Coypel. Engraved in 1746.) London, 1775. Folio.

     38. Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. London, 1776. Four vols.
     12mo.

     39. The Life of ... Don Quixote. London, 1778. 8vo. (Abridged.)

     40. The much-esteemed History of ... Don Quixote. Glasgow, 1784.
     12mo.

     41. The History of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Smollet. London,
     1782. Four vols. 12mo.

     42. The History and Adventures of ... Don Quixote. Translated by
     Smollet. London, 1786. Four vols. 12mo.

     43. The History and Adventures of ... Don Quixote. Translated by
     Smollet. London, 1792. Four vols. 12mo.

     44. The History of Don Quixote. London, 1792. 8vo.

     45. The History of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Smollet. London,
     1793. Four vols. 12mo.

     46. The History of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Smollet. London,
     1794. 8vo.

     47. The History of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Smollet. London,
     1795. 8vo.

     48. Don Quixote. Translated by Smollet. Dublin, 1796. Four vols.
     8vo.

     49. The History and Adventures of ... Don Quixote. Translated by
     Dr. Smollet. London (1797?). Five vols. 12mo.

     49_a_. History ... of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Smollet.
     London, 1799. Four vols. 8vo.

     50. The History of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Dr. Smollet.
     London (1801?). Four vols. 12mo.

     51. The Life and Exploits of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis.
     London, 1801. Four vols. 8vo.

     52. The History of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Motteux.
     Edinburgh, 1803. Four vols. 12mo.

     53. The Adventures of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Smollet.
     Glasgow, 1803. Four vols. 12mo.

     54. The History of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Smollet.
     Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Washington, 1803. Four vols. 12mo.

     55. The Life and Exploits of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis.
     London, 1809. Four vols. 16mo.

     56. The Life and Exploits of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis.
     London, 1809. Two vols. 4to.

     57. The Life and Exploits of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis.
     London, 1810. Four vols. 8vo.

     58. The Life and Exploits of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis.
     London, 1811. Four vols. 12mo.

     59. The History of Don Quixote. Edinburgh, 1815. Four vols. 12mo.

     60. The History and Adventures of Don Quixote. Translated by
     Smollet. New York, 1814. Four vols. 12mo.

     61. The History and Adventures of ... Don Quixote. Translated by
     Smollet. London, 1818. Two vols. 24mo.

     62. Don Quixote de la Mancha. Edited by Miss Mary Smirke (from
     translations of Shelton, Motteux, Jarvis, and Smollet?) London,
     1818. Four vols. 8vo.

     63. Don Quixote de la Mancha. Translation of Jarvis. London, 1819.
     Four vols. 8vo.

     64. The Life and Adventures of Don Quixote de la Mancha. London,
     1820. Four vols. 8vo.

     65. Don Quixote Abridged. London, 1820. 8vo.

     66. The Life and Exploits of Don Quixote de la Mancha. Translated
     by Jarvis. London, 1821. Four vols. 12mo.

     67. Don Quixote. London, 1821. Three vols. 8vo.

     68. The Life and Exploits of Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis.
     London, N.D. Four vols. 18mo.

     69. The History of ... Don Quixote. Translated by Motteux.
     Edinburgh and London, 1822. Five vols. 8vo.

     70. Don Quixote ... Translated by Jarvis. London, 1824. Two vols.
     12mo.

     70_a_. Don Quixote ... Translated by C. Jarvis. London, 1825. Four
     vols. 12mo. Reprint.

     71. The Life and Exploits of Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis.
     Exeter, 1828. Four vols. 16mo.

     72. Don Quixote Abridged. London, 1831. 8vo.

     73. The Life and Exploits of Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis.
     London, 1831. Two vols. 12mo.

     74. The History and Adventures of Don Quixote. Translated by
     Smollet. London, 1833. Three vols. 8vo.

     74_a_. The Life and Exploits of Don Quixote, 24 plates.
     Cruickshank. London, 1833. Two vols. Small 8vo.

     74_b_. Don Quixote ... London, 1834. 16mo. 15 Plates. Cruickshank.

     75. Don Quixote. London, 1836. 4to. (Forming part of a publication
     called “Works of Fiction.”)

     76. Don Quixote de la Mancha. Translated by Jarvis. London, 1837.
     Three vols. 4to.

     77. Don Quixote ... Translated by Jarvis. London, 1838. Three vols.
     8vo.

     78. The History of Don Quixote. Abridged from Smollet. Halifax,
     1839. 16mo.

     79. The Life and Exploits of Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis.
     London, 1840. Four vols. 12mo.

     80. Don Quixote de la Mancha. London, 1842. 8vo.

     81. Don Quixote de la Mancha. Translated by Jarvis. London, 1842.
     Two vols. 4to.

     81_a_. The Life and Exploits of Don Quixote Abridged. Pesth, 1846.
     8vo. [English edition printed in Hungary, with a transliteration
     for teaching English.]

     82. Don Quixote. London, 1847. 8vo.

     83. The History of Don Quixote. London and Boston, 1848. 8vo.

     84. Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. London, 1852. Two vols. 8vo.

     85. Don Quixote. London, 1853. 8vo.

     86. Don Quixote. New York, 1855. 12mo.

     87. Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. London, 1856. 8vo.

     88. Adventures of Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. London and New
     York, 1858. 8vo.

     89. Don Quixote. London, 1859. 4to.

     90. Don Quixote. New York, 1860. 8vo.

     91. The History of the Ingenious Gentleman, Don Quixote. Translated
     by Motteux. Boston, 1865. Four vols. 8vo.

     92. Adventures of Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. London and New
     York, 1866. 8vo.

     93. Adventures of Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. London, 1866.
     8vo.

     94. Adventures of Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. London, 1869.
     8vo.

     95. The History of Don Quixote. London, 1864, Reprinted 1867, 1870,
     1872, and 1876, 1878. 4to.

     96. The Adventures of Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. London,
     1870. 8vo.

     97. The History of Don Quixote. Translated by Motteux. Boston,
     1870. Four vols. 8vo.

     98. The Story of the Don ... for our Young Folks. London, 1870.
     8vo.

     99. Adventures of Don Quixote. Edinburgh, 1870. 8vo.

     100. The Adventures of Don Quixote. London, 1870. 4to.

     101. The History of Don Quixote. London, 1870. 16mo.

     102. The Story of Don Quixote and his Squire. London, 1871. 8vo.

     103. The Wonderful Adventures of Don Quixote. Abridged by Sir
     Marvellous Crackjoke. London (1872). 4to.

     104. The History of Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. New York,
     1875. 12mo. (Abbreviated.)

     105. Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. Philadelphia, 1875. 12mo.

     106. Adventures of Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. Philadelphia,
     1876. 8vo.

     107. Adventures of Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. New York,
     1874-76. Two vols. 4to.

     108. Adventures of Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. New York,
     1877. Two vols. 4to.

     109. Adventures of Don Quixote. Translated by Motteux. London
     (1877?). 8vo.

     110. Don Quixote. London, 1877. 8vo.

     111. The History of the Ingenious Gentleman, Don Quixote....
     Translated by Motteux. Edinburgh, 1879. Four vols. 8vo.

     112. Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. London, 1879. 8vo. Ibid.,
     1880. Ibid., 1881. Excelsior series.

     113. The Ingenious Knight, Don Quixote.... A new translation from
     the Original of 1605 and 1615, by Alex. James Duffield. London,
     1881. Three vols. 8vo. Dedicated to W. E. Gladstone.

     114. The History of Don Quixote. Translated by Motteux. London,
     1880-81. Four vols. 8vo.

     115. The Achievements of ... Don Quixote de la Mancha. Translated
     by Motteux. London, 1882. 8vo.

     116. Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. London, 1882. 4to.

     117. The Adventures of Don Quixote for Young Readers. London, 1883.
     4to.

     118. Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. Introduction by Henry
     Morley. London, 1885. 8vo.

     119. The George Cruickshank Edition ... Don Quixote. Translated by
     Jarvis. London and New York, 1885. 8vo.

     120. The Ingenious Gentleman, Don Quixote.... A translation by John
     Ormsby. London, 1885. 8vo.

     121. The Ingenious Gentleman, Don Quixote. Translated, with Notes
     by H. E. Watts. London (Quaritch), 1888. Five vols. 4to.

     122. Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. London, 1890. Two vols.
     8vo.

     123. Don Quixote. Translated by Jarvis. London, 1892. 8vo.

     124. The History of the Ingenious Gentleman, Don Quixote of La
     Mancha. Translated by Motteux. London, 1892. Three vols. 8vo.

     125. Don Quixote. Translated by H. E. Watts. London, 1895. Three
     vols. 4to. Reprint of No. 121.

     126. Don Quixote. Translated by John Ormsby. Edited by James
     Fitzmaurice-Kelly. London, 1904. Four vols.




LIST OF BIBLIOGRAPHIES OF

CERVANTES,

ARRANGED CHRONOLOGICALLY.


     1. Biblioteca Hisp., by Nicholas Antonius. Rome, 1676. Two vols.
     Folio.

     2. Anotaciones a la Historia de Don Quijote, by Dr. Bowles.
     Salisbury, 1781. 4to.

     3. Don Quijote (editions of), by Don Juan Pellicer. Madrid, 1797.
     Five vols. 8vo. First vol. Bibl.

     4. Allgemeines Bücher, by Hensius. Leipzig, 1812. Has a catalogue
     of the works of Cervantes.

     5. Manuel du Libraire, by Brunet. Paris, 1810, 1820, 1834, &c.
     Three vols. 8vo.

     6. Vida de Cervantes, by Navarrete. Madrid, 1819. 8vo. Has a
     Bibliography. The standard work to date.

     7. Manuel du Bibliophile, by G. Peignot. Dijon, 1823. Two vols.
     4to. Vol. 2 has the Bibliography.

     8. Catalogue of Books. Vincent Salva. London, 1826-29. 8vo, Copious
     lists of the various editions of the works of Cervantes.

     9. History of Spanish Literature, by George Ticknor. New York,
     London, 1849-50.

     10. Biblioteca de Autores Españoles. Vol. XXXIII. Madrid, 1854.

     11. Bibliographers’ Manual, by W. T. Lowndes. London, 1858. English
     editions of works of Cervantes.

     12. Vida de Cervantes, by Don Jerónimo Morán. Madrid, 1863. With
     Bibliography of works of Cervantes.

     13. Siete Cartas Sobre Cervantes y el Quixote ... by M. Droap.
     Cadiz, 1868. 4to.

     14. La Revista de España. Vol. IX. Observaciones ... de Ingenioso
     Hidalgo Don Quijote.... An erudite article on the earliest
     editions.

     15. Catálogo de Varias Obras ... referring to Cervantes. Sevilla,
     1872. Folio. Concerning authors who have written upon the life and
     works of Cervantes.

     16. Boletín de la Reproducción Foto-Tipográfica de la Primera
     Edicion de Don Quixote. With list of existing editions of Don
     Quixote. Nos. 5 and 6, 1872.

     17. Catalogo ... by Don Pedro Salva. Valencia, 1872. Two vols. 4to.
     Spanish editions of the works of Cervantes.

     18. Diccionario General ... by Don Dionisio Hidalgo. Madrid, 1872.
     4to. (List of Spanish editions and translations of Don Quixote, in
     Vol. V.)

     19. Crónica de los Cervantistas. Cadiz, 1872. Bibl. of works of
     Cervantes, with Notes.

     20. Quaritch’s General Catalogue. London, 1872. 8vo. List of works
     of Cervantes in various languages.

     21. Brief hand-list of the Cervantes Collection presented to the
     Birmingham Free Library, by W. Bragge, Esq., F.S.A. (This important
     collection had 143 editions of Quixote in many languages,
     sixty-four of the minor works, and sixty-nine works referring
     directly to Cervantes. Unfortunately, the fire, occurring in 1879,
     destroyed the greater portion of this inestimable collection.)

     22. Dictionnaire Universal du XIXe. Siècle, by Larousse. Paris,
     1866-78. Spanish editions, and translations of the works of
     Cervantes.

     23. Die Cervantes-Literatur in Deutschland, by Edmund Dorer.
     Zürich, 1877-1879. 8vo. In this, the author aims at a complete
     Bibliography of Cervantes.

     24. Catalogue of the Spanish and Portuguese Library, bequeathed by
     G. Ticknor to the Boston Public Library. Boston, 1879. 4to. An
     important collection of the works of Cervantes.

     25. Catálogo de la Biblioteca Cervántica de Leopoldo Rios.
     Barcelona, 1888. 4to. Amongst the works of Cervantes in this
     extraordinary and interesting collection are 172 editions of
     _Quijote_ in Spanish, 123 in French, 71 in English, 39 in German,
     13 in Italian, 9 in Dutch, 6 in Russian, 5 in Portuguese, 1 in
     Catalan, 3 in Hungarian, 3 in Danish, 2 in Bohemian, 2 in Swedish,
     2 in Greek, 1 in Polish, 1 in Servian, 1 in Croatian, 1 in Turkish,
     and 1 in Finnish; total, 456 editions represented. In addition to
     these, there are some 200 editions of his minor works, and 378
     editions of works containing references to Cervantes. Since the
     date of this catalogue, the number has been greatly augmented.

     26. Catálogo de la Biblioteca Cervantina de Don José Maria Asensio
     de Sevilla. Valencia, 1883. 4to. This collection of Don Asensio is
     remarkable for the number and beauty of the rare editions of Don
     Quixote, of which he possessed, in 1883, no less than 143 in
     Spanish and other languages.

     27. Nota de Algunos Libros, Articulos y Folletos Sobra la Vida y
     las Obras de ... Cervantes. Sevilla, 1885. 8vo. One hundred copies
     privately printed.

     28. Bibliography of the Works of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, by
     Jas. Fitzmaurice-Kelly. London, 1892. (Occupies part of “The Life
     of Cervantes.”)

     29. Catalogue de la Bibliothèque de M. Ricardo Heredia, Comte de
     Benahavis. Paris, 1891-94. 4to. (The library contains the
     collection of the Biblioteca de Salvá, augmented by the Comte de
     Benahavis.)

     30. La Ilustración Artistica á Cervantes. Barcelona, 1895. Folio.
     First part: Critical Biography. Second part: Bibliography. Third
     part: Iconography. The second and third parts relating to the
     un-illustrated and illustrated editions of the immortal _Don_.

     31. Bibliografica Critica de las Obras de Miguel de Cervantes
     Saavedra, by Don Leopoldo Rius. Madrid, 1895, 1899. Two vols. Royal
     8vo. This work is the first to contain a discerning criticism of
     all editions of the productions of the foremost genius of Spanish
     literature. The labour required to effect so excellent a result
     must have been prodigious, occupying many years, and Don Leopoldo
     Rius can only reap his reward in the thanks of the whole world.


COLECCIONES CERVÁNTICAS.

     32. Biblioteca Cervántica de Don Isidro Bonsoms, of Barcelona.
     Formed for the acquisition of works of, and relating to, Cervantes.
     Amongst the inestimable treasures are no less than 520 editions of
     _Quijote_ in Spanish and other languages; 210 examples of the minor
     works; whilst 500 works refer to Cervantes and his productions. Don
     Isidro Bonsoms possesses the recently-discovered copy of the
     English translation of Don Quixote, printed by William Stansby for
     Ed. Blount and W. Barret, 1612, in perfect state, and of which no
     other copy is known. It is described in the _Bibliografia Critica_
     of Don Leopoldo Rius, Vol. I., p. 388. Madrid, 1895. See also No. 1
     of the present list of English translations of Don Quixote.

     33. Biblioteca Cervántica del Rdo. D. Clemente Cortejón, of
     Barcelona, contains 300 editions of _Quijote_ in divers languages,
     in addition to a large and valuable collection of the minor works.

     34. Biblioteca Cervántica del Excmo. Sr. Marqués de Jerez de los
     Caballeros, of Sevilla. This collection is notable for the editions
     of _Quijote_ it contains in Spanish and various translations,
     together with a large number of the minor works of Cervantes, and
     books relating to him.




SYNOPSIS OF THE EDITIONS OF DON QUIXOTE.


    +----------+--------------------++---------+
    |LANGUAGE. |     CENTURIES.     ||  Total  |
    |          |/--------^---------\||   of    |
    |          |XVII. |XVIII.| XIX. ||Editions.|
    +----------+------+------+------++---------+
    |Spanish   |  27  |  33  | 152  ||   212   |
    |French    |  22  |  37  |  99  ||   158   |
    |English   |  10  |  45  |  78  ||   133   |
    |German    |   5  |  10  |  36  ||    51   |
    |Italian   |   4  |   4  |  12  ||    20   |
    |Russian   |      |   2  |  18  ||    20   |
    |Dutch     |   5  |   3  |   8  ||    16   |
    |Swedish   |      |      |   8  ||     8   |
    |Hungarian |      |      |   6  ||     6   |
    |Portuguese|      |   1  |   4  ||     5   |
    |Polish    |      |   1  |   3  ||     4   |
    |Catalan   |      |      |   3  ||     3   |
    |Danish    |      |   1  |   2  ||     3   |
    |Bohemian  |      |      |   3  ||     3   |
    |Greek     |      |      |   2  ||     2   |
    |Servian   |      |      |   2  ||     2   |
    |Roumanian |      |      |   1  ||     1   |
    |Croatian  |      |      |   1  ||     1   |
    |Finnish   |      |      |   1  ||     1   |
    |Turkish   |      |      |   1  ||     1   |
    +----------+------+------+------++---------+
    |  Total   |  73  | 137  | 440  ||   650   |
    +----------+------+------+------++---------+
    _Note.--This Table is compiled to 1895._

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF CERVANTES ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
</doc>
<doc id="file28566134" filename="pg32222.txt" parent_folder="History" url="https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/32222/pg32222.txt">
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Felicitas, by Felix Dahn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Felicitas
       A Tale of the German Migrations: A.D. 476

Author: Felix Dahn

Translator: Mary J. Safford

Release Date: May 2, 2010 [EBook #32222]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FELICITAS ***




Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by Google Books




Source:
http://books.google.com/books?pg=PA223&dq=editions:HARVARDHN1MDZ&id=8bc
YAAAAYAAJ#v=onepage&q&f=false






                               FELICITAS






                               FELICITAS


                   _A TALE OF THE GERMAN MIGRATIONS_
                                A.D. 476



                                   BY
                               FELIX DAHN



                       TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN
                                   BY
                              M. A. C. E.



                                 LONDON
                           MACMILLAN AND CO.
                                  1883
                        [_All rights reserved_]






                       CHARLES DICKENS AND EVANS,
                         CRYSTAL PALACE PRESS.






                               FELICITAS.




                             INTRODUCTION.


Some years ago I was at work in Salzburg: in the library among the old
records, and in the Museum of Roman antiquities.

My studies were principally concerned with the fifth century: the time
when the Germanic tribes invaded these regions, the Roman garrisons
retiring with or without resistance, while many settlers remained in
the land. Peasants, trades-people, mechanics, would not forsake their
homes, nor give up their lucrative occupations, would not quit their
valued, long-cherished plots of ground, but stayed under the rule of
the Barbarian; who, when the storm and battle of conquest were over,
and the division of the country completed, did not molest them.

The work of the day over, I wandered in the beautiful, long-familiar
country of the Salzach valley; the warm June evenings permitted long
wanderings up to a late hour. Thought and fancy were filled with the
pictures of the life and the changing fate of the latest Romans in
these lands. My imagination was excited by the inscriptions, coins, and
utensils, by the Roman monuments of every kind which are found in such
rich abundance in and around Salzburg; for this town, with its
prominent fortress, the "Capitolium," on the rocky hill dominating
stream and valley, was for centuries, under the name of "Claudium
Juvavum," a chief bulwark of the Roman rule and the seat of a
flourishing and brilliant development of the Roman culture. The
inscriptions testify to the official rank of many of the citizens, such
as Duumvirs, Decurions, Ædiles of the markets and games; to the
importance of the town as a place of trade, and to the encouragement
given to the arts and manufactures.

That which had occupied me during the labours of the day was pictured
by the play of fancy, when in the evening I wandered out through the
gate of the town: stream and road, hill and valley, were then peopled
for me with forms of the Roman life; and from the distant north-west,
like the driving clouds that often arose from the Bavarian plain,
approached menacingly the invading Germans.

Most frequently, I preferred to saunter along the banks of the stream
in the direction of the great Roman road, which passed the Chiemsee,
and crossing its effluent, the Alz, at Siebruck (Bedaium), and the Inn
(Oenus) at Pfünz (Pons Oeni), led towards the province of Vindelicia
and its splendid capital, Augsburg (Augusta Vindelicorum). Many coins,
fragments of pottery, urns, gravestones, and household utensils of
every kind have been found in the level country which stretches on each
side of the old highroad, and is now for the most part covered with
forest and brushwood, and in some parts overgrown with thick ivy. It is
evident that farms, and also stately villas of the rich citizens, were
thickly scattered beyond the outer wall of the fortified town, thus
filling and adorning the whole valley. I often wandered in the
neighbourhood of this Roman road, the traces of which were still
distinctly visible, watching the setting sun, and wondering what were
the feelings of the inhabitants of these villas, when, instead of the
proud Legions marching by on their way to the Roman town on the Lech,
it was the first weak bands of the Germans from the conquered
Vindelicia who galloped in, carefully reconnoitring; and soon to
be followed by larger masses, more daring, or rather having the
well-grounded confidence that they would find the country only weakly
defended, and would be able to establish themselves as masters over the
defenceless Romans who still remained.

In such fancies, not without the silent wish that I might myself glean
some small memorial of Roman times from this land so rich in
remembrances, I penetrated one evening deeper into the brushwood on the
right of the Roman road, following upwards the course of a small
stream, through a hollow often strewn with broken stones and potsherds,
which moss and ivy had thickly overgrown, and which cracked not seldom,
under my footsteps. I picked up many tiles and bits of pottery. Were
they Roman? No certain evidence could be gathered from _these_.

I determined to-day to follow the rivulet till I should reach its
source, which I imagined to be under the gentle slope of a moderately
high hill; for I knew that the Romans liked to build their quiet villas
as well as their military stations by running water.

It was very hot on that summer day, I was tired in body and mind, and
it was only slowly, and with difficulty, that I could ascend the course
of the brook, forcing my way through the thick and often nearly
impassable bushes by the help of my alpenstock, which I carried with,
me, as I often climbed the mountains in my wanderings.

I could willingly have stretched myself drowsily on the soft inviting
moss; but I resisted the inclination, and determined to press through
and up to the goal I had set myself: the source of the stream.

In half an hour the slope was reached; the height is called by the
people, "the Pagan mound." Along the latter part of the way I had
noticed a striking increase in the number and size of the fragments of
stone; among them also were red and gray marble, like that which had
been quarried in the neighbourhood for unnumbered centuries; and it
was, as I had imagined, close under the crown of the hill the stream
trickled out of the ground.

It appeared to have been once surrounded by masonry; this was in part
still perceptible, carefully polished clear gray marble enclosed it
here and there in a handsome setting, and round about lay scattered
numerous tiles. My heart beat quickly, not only in consequence of the
arduous climb, but also, I confess it, in hopeful expectation, I was
yet very young. Suppose if to-day and here, Mercury, the Roman, or
Wotan, the German god of wishes and discovery, should give into my hand
the long-desired memorial of the Romans of Juvavum; the name "Pagan
mound" gave undoubted evidence of the Roman occupation--for the Roman
road is here called the "Pagan road"--added to this, the source of the
spring, the traces of the marble setting, the many tiles--then the
sun's rays, just before setting, fell across the brushwood and shone
directly on the tile-slab lying before me. Cement! I picked it up and
tested it; it was without doubt that Roman cement which, becoming hard
as stone during the lapse of centuries, so marks out the buildings of
eternal Rome, I turned the piece over; there, O joy! was burnt in the
undoubted motto of the Twenty-second Legion: _Primigenia pia fidelis!_
And as I bend down, highly pleased, to try the next brick, a yet
stronger sunbeam falls on a piece of peculiar light-gray stone. It is
marble, I see now, and on the surface there are three Roman letters
distinctly visible: "hic...." There the stone was broken; but close to
it, the broken edge of a similar piece of gray stone projected from the
moss and ivy. Does the continuation of the inscription lie here buried
under a covering of moss and turf?

I pulled at the stone, but it was too heavy, either from the load of
earth or from its own size.

After some useless efforts, I found that I must clear off the layers of
turf and moss before the marble would entrust me with its secret.

Had it one to narrate? Certainly! I held the commencement in my hand:
"Hic," "here"--_what_ had here taken place, or was here attested?

After I had with my pocket-knife cleared the first piece from earth and
root-fibres, I held its broken surface to that of the still covered
slab; they fitted very well together. Then I set to work; it was not
easy, not soon over; with hand, knife, and the point of my alpenstock,
I had to scrape and tear away fully two feet of turf, earth, moss, and,
toughest of all, the numerous little roots of the clasping ivy;
although the sun was setting and the breeze was cool, the labour made
me very hot; the perspiration fell from my brow on the old Roman stone,
which now showed itself as a tolerably long slab. After the first few
minutes my zeal was sharpened by perceiving more letters. It was at
last so far laid bare that I could take hold of the edges with both
hands, and with some little jerks bring it fully to view. I then held
the broken stone with the deciphered _hic_ against it; this gave me the
direction in which farther to search.

I hastily scraped away earth, stones, and moss from the cutting of the
letters, for it was quickly getting darker, and I wished to make out at
once the long-buried secret. I succeeded; without question, though
certainly with difficulty, I read the inscription, in two lines under
each other:

            Hic habitat Felicit...
            Nihil mali intret.

The two last letters of the third word alone were missing; the stone
was here broken away, and its companion piece was not to be found; but
it was self-evident that the missing letters were--as--the inscription
meant:

            Here dwells happiness;
            May nothing evil enter in.

Clearly the gray marble slab had formed the threshold of the entrance
to the garden or porch of the villa; and the adage expressed the wish
that all evil might be kept far from the door.

I sought in vain for yet farther traces, for remains of household
utensils.

Pleased and satisfied with the discovery of the pretty proverb, I then
rested.

Wiping my heated brow, I sat down on the soft moss by my work, thinking
again and again of the words; I supported my back against an old oak,
which had grown up out of the rubbish of the house, or, perhaps, out of
the good mould of the little garden.

A wondrous quiet reigned over the hill, which was quite separated from
the world by trees and bushes.

Only very, very faintly one heard the trickling of the small, scanty
vein of water which came out of the earth close by me, and only
sometimes, when it found a quicker fall, rippled more strongly. Once,
no doubt, when handsomely enclosed in the clear gray marble, it had
spoken loader.

In the distance, on the summit of a high beech, the golden oriole sang
its flute-like evening song, which told of still deeper forest
loneliness, for the listener seldom hears the notes of the "Pirol,"
except in such a solitude. Bees hummed here and there over the mossy
carpet, coming out of the dark thicket and seeking the warmer light,
sleepy themselves and lulling to sleep with their humming.

I thought, whose "happiness" once dwelt here? And has the wish of the
inscription been fulfilled? Was the proverb powerful enough to keep off
all evil? The stone which bore it is broken--a bad sign. And what kind
of happiness was this? But stay! At that time Felicitas occurs as a
_woman's name_; perhaps the proverb, with a graceful double meaning,
would say: "Here dwells happiness; that is to say, my Felicitas; may
nothing evil come over her, over our threshold!"

But "Felicitas"--who was she? and who was he, whose happiness she had
been, and what had become of them? And this villa, how----?

This was my last waking thought, for with the last question I fell
asleep.

And long did I slumber; for when the song of the nightingale, loudly
exultant, close to my ear, awoke me, it was dark night; a single star
shone through the branches of the oak. I sprang up: "Felicitas!
Fulvius!" I cried, "Liuthari! Felicitas! where are they?"

"Felicitas!" softly repeated the echo from the hill. All else was still
and dark.

So was it a dream?

Now, _this_ dream I will retain.

Felicitas, I hold thee!

Thou shalt not escape me.

Poetical fancy can immortalise thee.

And I hastened home, and the same night noted down the history which I
had dreamt among the ruins of the old Roman villa.




                               CHAPTER I.


It was a beautiful evening in June, The sun threw its golden beams from
the west, from Vindelicia, on the Mercurius Hill, and the modest villa
which crowned it.

Here and there on the great street a two-wheeled cart, drawn by a yoke
of Noric oxen, was returning home at the close of the market-day
through the west gate of Juvavum, the _Porta Vindelica_. The colonists
and peasants had been selling vegetables, fowls, and pigeons in the
Forum of Hercules; but the bustle of the street reached the hill only
as a murmur. Here it was still and quiet; one only heard outside the
low stone wall which surrounded the garden the lively rippling of a
little spring, which at its source was prettily enclosed in marble, and
after it had fed the fountain in the middle, and had wandered through
the garden in artificially winding rivulets, escaped through a gap in
the wall and hurried down the hill in a stone channel. Close by was the
gate entrance, surmounted by a statue of Mercury, but open, without
door or lattice. In the direction of the town, towards the south-east,
there lay at the foot of the hill carefully tended vegetable and fruit
gardens, meadows with the most succulent verdure, and corn-fields with
luxuriant grain, which products the Romans had brought into the land of
the barbarians.

Behind the villa, towards the north, fine beech-woods towered and
rustled, ascending the mountain slopes; and out of their depths sounded
from afar the metallic note of the golden oriole.

It was so beautiful, so peaceful; but from the west--and no less from
the south-east!--threatening storm-clouds were rising.

From the entrance a straight path, strewn with white sand, led through
the wide-spreading garden, between tall ilices and yews, which
according to the long ruling fashion had been cut into all kinds of
geometrical figures--a taste, or rather want of taste, which the Rococo
did not invent, but only newly borrowed from the gardens of the
Imperators.

Statues were placed at regular intervals in the space between the
garden gate and the entrance to the dwelling-house: nymphs, a Flora, a
satyr, a Mercury--bad work in plaster; the stout Crispus made them by
the dozen in his workshop on the Vulcan market-place in Juvavum; and he
sold them cheap: for the times were not good for _men_, and were bad
for gods and demi-gods; but these were all gifts, for Crispus was the
father's brother of the young householder.

From the entrance of the garden, echoing from the stone wall of the
enclosure, there sounded several strokes of a hammer, only lightly, for
they were given carefully by an artist-hand; they seemed to be the last
improving, finishing efforts of a master.

Now the hammerer sprang up; he had been kneeling just within the
entrance, near to which, standing upright against each other, were some
dozen yet unworked marble slabs, which pointed out the dwelling of a
stone-mason. He stuck the little hammer into the leather belt which
fastened the skin apron over his blue tunic, shook from a little
oil-flask a few drops on a woollen cloth, rubbed therewith the marble
till it was smooth as a mirror, turned his head aside, as a bird will
that wishes to look closely at anything, and then, nodding well
pleased, read from the slab at the entrance:

"Yes, yes! here dwells happiness; _my_ happiness, _our_ happiness: so
long as my Felicitas dwells here--happy and making happy. May
misfortune never step over this threshold: banished by the adage, may
every bad spirit Halt! Now is the house beautifully finished by this
inscription. But where is she, then? She must see it and praise me.
Felicitas," cried he, turning towards the house, "come then!"

He wiped the sweat from his brow, and stood upright--a supple, youthful
form, slender, not above the middle height, not unlike the Mercury of
the garden, whose proportions Crispus had formed according to old
tradition; dark-brown hair, in short curls, covered almost like a cap
his round head; under large eyebrows, two dark eyes laughed pleasantly
on the world; the naked feet and arms showed a fine shape, but little
strength; only in the right arm powerful muscles raised themselves; the
brown skin apron was sprinkled white with marble dust, he shook it off,
and cried again louder, "Felicitas!"

Then appeared on the threshold of the house a white figure, who,
drawing back the dark-yellow curtain, which was fastened to rings
running on a bronze rod, was framed like a picture in the two pilasters
of the entrance--a quite young girl--or was it a young wife? Yes, she
must be already a wife, this child of hardly seventeen years, for she
is without doubt the mother of the infant which, with her left arm, she
nestles to her bosom: only the mother holds a child with such
expression in the movements and countenance. Two fingers of the right
hand, the inner surface turned outwards, the young mother laid on her
lips: "Be quiet!" said she, "our child sleeps." And now the hardly
full-ripe form glided down the four stone steps which led from the
house into the garden, with the left arm carefully raising the child
higher and pressing it closer, with the right gently lifting the hem of
her plaited robe as high as her well-formed ankles. It was a spectacle
of perfect grace: young and childlike, like Raphael's Madonna, but not
humble and at the same time mystically glorious, as the mother of the
Christ-child; there was nothing incomprehensible, nothing miraculous,
only a noble simplicity and yet royal loftiness in her unconscious
dignity and innocence. There floated, as it were, a sweet-sounding
music round the figure of this Hebe, every movement being in perfect
harmony; wife and yet maiden; entirely human, perfectly at rest and
contented in the love of her young husband and of the child at her
breast. Lovely, touching, and dignified at the same time, in all the
perfect beauty of her figure, her face and her complexion so modest,
that in her presence, as before a beautiful statue, every wish was
silent.

She wore no ornament; her light-brown hair, shining with a golden
lustre when the sun kissed it, flowed back in natural waves from the
open, well-formed temples, leaving the rather low forehead free, and
was fastened at her neck in a loose knot. A milk-white robe of the
finest wool, fastened on the left shoulder with a beautifully shaped,
but simple silver brooch, hung in folds down to her ankles, showing the
pretty red leather sandals; leaving bare the neck and arms, which were
still childlike, but rather too long. The robe was fastened at the
waist with a wide bronze girdle.

Thus she moved silently down the steps, and approached her husband. The
long narrow face had that wonderful, almost bluish-white, complexion
only possessed by the daughters of Ionia, and which no noon-tide sun of
the south can embrown; the eye-brows, in a half-circle, regular as if
drawn with compasses, might have given to the countenance a lifeless,
statuesque appearance, but under the long, slightly curved, black
eye-lashes, the dark-brown gazelle-like eyes, now directed towards her
beloved, shone with a life full of feeling.

He flew towards her with an elastic step, lifted carefully, tenderly,
the sleeping child from her arm, and taking the flat straw lid from his
tool-basket, he placed the child on it, under the shade of a rose-bush.
The evening breeze threw the scented leaves of a full-blown rose on the
little one: he smiled in his sleep.

Then the master, winding his arm round the waist of his young wife, led
her to the just completed entrance-slab, and said:

"Now is the proverb ready, which I have kept hidden from thee till I
could finish it; now read, and know, and feel"--and he kissed her
tenderly on the mouth: "Thou--thou thyself art the happiness; _Thou_
dwellest here."

The young wife held her hand before her eyes to protect them from the
sun, which now shone in almost horizontal beams through the open
gateway; she read and blushed, the colour rose perceptibly in her
delicate white cheeks, her bosom heaved, her heart beat quickly: "O
Fulvius! thou art good. How thou dost love me! How happy we are!" And
she laid her two hands and arms on his right shoulder, on the other her
beautiful head.

He heartily pressed her to himself. "Yes, overflowing, without shadow
is our happiness--without measure or end."

Quickly, with a slight trembling, as if shivering, she raised herself,
and looked him anxiously in the face: "O, do not provoke the holy ones.
It is whispered," said she, herself whispering, "they are envious." And
she held her hand before his mouth.

But he pressed a loud kiss upon the small fingers, and cried: "I am not
jealous, I, a _man_--why should the holy ones be envious? I do not
believe that. I do not believe it of the holy ones--nor of the heathen
gods, if indeed they still have life and power."

"Speak not of them! They certainly live!--but they are bad spirits, and
he who names them, he calls them near; thus warns the Presbyter of the
Basilica."

"I fear them not. They have protected our ancestors for many
generations."

"Yes, but we have turned away from them! They defend us no longer. Only
the saints are our defenders against the barbarians. Alas! if they came
here, trampled down the flowers in the garden, and carried away our
child."

And she knelt down and kissed the little sleeper.

But the young father laughed. "The Germans, dost thou mean? they steal
no children! They have more than they can feed. But it is true----they
may perhaps one day sound out their war-cry before the gates of
Juvavum."

"Yes, that they may, very soon!" broke in an anxious voice, and the fat
Crispus, breathing heavily after his hot walk, entered the garden.

"Ave, Phidias in plaster," cried Fulvius to him.

"Welcome, uncle," said Felicitas, giving him her hand.

The broad-brimmed felt hat which he had drawn over his brow to protect
his red, fat, shining, good-humoured face, and his stump nose, from the
sun, Crispus threw on his neck, so that it hung by the leather strap on
his broad back. "May Hygeia never leave thee, my daughter; the Graces
never forsake thee, their fourth sister. Yes, the Germans! A horseman
came last night with secret information for the Tribune. But two hours
after we knew it all, we, early guests at the Baths of Amphitrite. The
rider is a Wascon; no Wascon keeps his mouth closed if you pour wine
therein. A battle has been fought at the ford of the Isar: our troops
have fled, the watch-tower of Vada is burnt. The barbarians have
crossed the river."

"Bah!" laughed Fulvius, "that is yet far away. Go, darling, prepare a
cooling drink for our uncle--thou knowest what he likes: not too much
water! And _if_ they come, they will not eat us. They are fierce giants
in battle--children after the victory. Have I not lived months among
them as their prisoner? I fear nothing from them."

"Nothing for thyself--but for this sweet wife?"

Felicitas did not hear this question; she had taken up the child and
gone with it into the house.

Fulvius shook his curly locks. "No! They would do nothing to her, that
is not their custom. Certainly, did I fall, she would not be long left
a widow. But there are people not in the bearskins of the barbarians,
who would willingly tear her from the arms of her husband."

And he seized angrily the hammer in his belt.

"She must not suspect anything of it, the pure heart!" continued he.

"Certainly not. But thou must be on the watch. I met the Tribune lately
in the office of the old money-lender."

"The usurer! the blood-sucker!"

"I was able, fortunately, to pay him my little debt. The slave
announced me. I waited behind the curtain: I then heard a deep voice
mention thy name--and Felicitas. I entered. The Tribune stood with the
money-dealer. They were quickly silent when they perceived me. And just
now, on the way here, whom should I overtake on the highway? Leo the
Tribune, and Zeno the money-dealer! The latter pointed with his staff
to thy house, the flat roof of which, with its little statues,
projected above the trees. I guessed their conversation, and the object
of their journey. Unseen I sprang from the road into the ditch, and
hastened by the shorter way, the steep meadow path, to warn thee. Take
care--they will soon be here."

"Let him only come, the miser! I have earned and carefully put away the
sum that I owe him for marble supplied from Aquileia, and for the town
taxes. My other creditors I have asked to wait, or rather promised them
higher interest, and have put all the money together for this
destroyer. But what does the Tribune want with me? I owe him nothing,
except a knife-thrust for the look with which he devoured my precious
one."

"Be careful! _His_ knife is more powerful: it is the sword; and behind
him stand the wild Mauritanian cavalry, and the Isaurian hirelings,
whom we must pay with precious gold to protect us from the barbarians."

"But who defends us from the defenders? The Emperor in distant Ravenna?
He rejoices if the Germans do not cross the Alps; he troubles himself
no more about this land, which has been so long Roman."

"Except in extortionate taxes, to squeeze out our last blood-drops."

"Bah! The State taxes! It is many years since they were collected. No
Imperial functionary ventures now over the mountains. I stand indeed
here on Imperial soil. But what is the name of the man who is now
Emperor, and to whom this bit of land belongs, of which he has never
heard? Every two years another Emperor is made known to us--but only
through the coinage."

"And that becomes ever worse."

"It _cannot_ get worse; that is a comfort."

"A friend tells me that the taxes get more and more intolerable in
Mediolanum, where there are still bailiffs and soldiers to levy them by
force."

"And it may be the same with us," laughed the young man. "Who knows how
much I am already in debt for these two acres of land?"

"And the roads of the Legions are overgrown with grass and brushwood."

"And the troops receive no wages."

"But they pay themselves by plundering the burghers, whom they should
defend."

"And the walls of Juvavum are falling, the moats are dry, the sluices
destroyed; the rich people go away, there only remain poor wretches
like ourselves, who cannot leave."

"I wonder that the money-lender has not long ago moved with his great
gold-bag over the Alps."

"I would not go, uncle, if I could; and why, indeed, could I not? My
art, my trade will be honoured everywhere, so long as the Romans dwell
in stone, not wooden houses, like the Germans. But I am firmly fixed to
this soil. Many, many generations have my fathers dwelt here; they say
since the founding of the colony by the Emperor Hadrian. They have
cleared the forests, drained the marshes, made roads, raised fords,
laid out house and garden, grafted the rich fruits on the wild apple
and pear-trees; the climate itself has become milder. I know Italy, I
have bought marble in Venetia, but I would rather live here on the old
inheritance of my fathers."

"But if the barbarians come, wilt thou then also?"----

"Stay! I have my own thoughts about that. For us unimportant people it
is better under the barbarians than"----

"Say not, than under the Emperor. Thou art a Roman!"

The stout Crispus said this very gravely, but the other laughed; the
good uncle but little resembled a Roman hero. His neighbours declared
that he modelled his statues of Bacchus from his own figure.

"Half-blood! My mother was a Noric Celt. Induciomara! That does not
sound much of the Quirinal."

"And we do not stand under the Emperor, but under his hangman servants,
Exchequer officials, and under the murderous fist of the Moorish and
Isaurian troops. If I must serve barbarians, I prefer the Germans."

"But they are heathen."

"In part. A hundred and fifty years ago so were we all. My grandfather
sacrificed secretly to Jupiter. And there are also Christians among
them."

"Arians! heretics! worse than heathen, says the Holy Church."

"A few decades past our emperors were also heretics. And the Germans
ask no one what he believes; but how heavily did our fathers suffer, if
their faith did not exactly agree with that of the ruling emperor!"

"You take too lenient a view of the coming of the barbarians. They have
set fire to many towns."

"Yes; but stone does not burn. The Romans quickly fit new timbers in
the undestroyed walls. Then no German settles in a town. They pasture
their herds on the land; it is the peasant in his farm who suffers from
them. They take from him a third of his fields and pasturage. But the
land profits thereby. It is now sadly dispeopled; nowhere is there a
free peasant on a free soil. For the masters, whom they never see, who
carouse in Naples or Byzantium, _slaves_ cultivate the ground, or
rather they do _not_ cultivate it, they only work enough to keep them
from starving. If they gained more the slave-master would take it from
them. But it is different with plough and sickle, when hundreds of
Germans press into the country, each with innumerable white-headed
children. For so many children as _these_ people have, I could not have
imagined over the whole earth!--And in a few years the grown-up son
builds his own wooden house in the cleared forest or the drained swamp.
They swarm over the furrows like ants, and they soon throw away their
old wooden plough-shares and copy the iron shares of the colonists, and
in a few years the land bears so much more than formerly, that it
richly feeds both conquerors and conquered."

"Yes, yes," nodded Crispus, "we have seen all that in the frontier
lands, where they have settled. If the sons become too numerous they
cast lots, and the third part, that draws the lot to migrate, wanders
on wherever hawk or wolf directs; but never back, never towards the
north!" sighed Crispus, "so they press ever nearer to us."----

"But they leave us our laws, our language, our God, our Basilica, and
demand much, much less in tribute than the slave-master of the landlord
or the tax-gatherer of the Emperor."

"It is well that Severus does not hear you, the old _armaturarum
magister_ in Juvavum; he would"----

"Yes, he thinks we have yet the old times, and there are still living
the old Romans as in the days of that tamer of the Germans, the Emperor
Probus, of whose race he counts himself. But by the saints he is
mistaken. Why should I be over zealous for the Emperor? He, this
Emperor, certainly shows no zeal for me; in strong Ravenna he sits and
invents new taxes, and new punishments for those who pay no taxes,
because they have nothing."

"The old Severus has long been drilling volunteers to lead against the
barbarians, in case they should roam this way. I have been there a few
days, painfully carrying spear and shield in this heat. I have never
seen thee, so much younger and stronger, on our '_Campus Martius_,' as
they call it."

Fulvius laughed. "I have no need, uncle; I have learnt to use arms long
enough while a prisoner with the Germans, and if the town and one's own
hearth must be defended I shall not be wanting--for honour's sake! not
that I think we shall do much; for, believe me, if they seriously
intend to come, that is, if they _must_ because they _need_ our acres,
then Severus will not keep them back with his old-fashioned generalship
and his new-fashioned 'Legions of the Capitol of Juvavum,' under the
golden eagle which he has presented to them. Nor the Tribune either
with his cavalry from Africa and his mercenaries from Isauria. But
look! Philemon, the slave, is beckoning; I see the drinking-cup shining
on the seat in the little porch--the table is ready. Now drink of our
rough Räter-wine; Augustus long ago knew how to value it, and it has
been already a year in the cellar since the pack-mule brought it here
from the Tyrol. Let us look at Felicitas and the child at her breast,
and forget emperors and barbarians."




                              CHAPTER II.


Meanwhile, slowly walking up the high-road, the two men whom Crispus
had announced were approaching the villa; they often stood still,
interrupting their progress with an animated conversation.

"No, no," warned the money-dealer, shaking his bald head, which, in
spite of the sun, was uncovered, and striking with his staff on the
hard road, "such haste, such violence, such impetuosity, as thy
passionate longing craves, will not answer, O friend Tribune. Only
leave me alone! We are on the right, the safe way."

"Thy way is a crooked, weary, roundabout way, a snail-pace," cried the
soldier impatiently, and he threw back his proud head so that the black
plume of his helmet rustled on the links of his armour. "To what
purpose are these ceremonies? They do not hasten the time when you
shall add the little property to your vast possessions. And I--I cannot
sleep since the sight of this young woman has inflamed my passions. My
heart beats to breaking. All night I toss on my hot couch. By the
ungirdled Astarte of Tripolis! I _will_ have this slender Felicitas!
And I _must_ have her, or my veins will burst." And his fiery black
eyes flashed.

"Thou shalt have her, only patience."

"No! no patience. A sword-thrust will make the milk-sop of a husband
cold; in these arms will I lift the struggling one on Pluto, my black
horse, and quick to the Capitol, even if all the market-women of
Juvavum raise an outcry behind me."

"Murder and rape! Thou knowest the punishment."

"Bah! Would an accuser come forward? And the Emperor? The Emperor of
_Juvavum_--is myself. Let us see who will climb the walls of my
Capitolium."

"The Cross, my roaring Leo, the Cross and the Presbyter. No, no, it
must not be an open sin crying to heaven. True, the Judge and his
lictors are weak in this land, which is almost given up by Rome. But
the Church is so much the stronger. If the haggard, white-bearded
Johannes thrust thee out, thou art a lost man. No pound of meat, no cup
of wine, will the people of Juvavum again sell to thee."

"I will take what I need with my lancers."

"But thy lancers are Mauritanians: pious Christians, baptised by the
Presbyter. See if they will follow, if the old man have cursed thee."

"I will strike him dead after, or rather, before the curse," cried the
officer, and he made a quick step forwards; his long dark-red mantle
floated in the wind.

But the money-changer again stopped, adjusting with his bony fingers
his yellow tunic.

"How useless! Dost thou not know that _they_ are immortal? If thou
strikest _one_ dead, the Bishop sends another. And they are all
alike--much more than thy soldiers resemble each other. And I--I would
not look at thee across the street if thou wert thrust out from the
Holy Church."

But now the soldier stopped and laughed aloud: "Thou! Zeno of
Byzantium! Thou believest as little in the Holy Church as Leo himself.
And it is my opinion, that thy soul-destroying usury is not regarded
more favourably by the saints, than my trifle of pleasure in love and
murder. What hast thou to do with the Church?"

"I will tell thee, thou rash son of Mars. I _fear_ her! She is the only
power now left in these lands. The Emperor is far away, his officers
are all venal; the barbarians are like the storm, they bluster around
us, we bend to them, and they again bluster away; but the Church is
everywhere, even if only a single priest says mass in a half-ruined
house of prayer. And the priest is not to be bought. The miserable
creature dares not live like a man, so he needs nothing; and all who
hope for heaven follow him, that is to say: all fools. But woe to the
man who has the fools against him--he is lost. No, no! we must not
rouse the Church against us."

"I need him yet, the sneak!" grated Leo through his teeth, with an
angry look at his companion; and he impatiently pushed aside his short,
broad sword in the finely-worked scabbard.

"For that reason truly, I have to serve you," continued the merchant.

"For a good reward," interrupted Leo scornfully.

"But which, alas! I have yet only received in half."

"The other half when I have the gazelle-eyed beauty in my chamber."

"For that reason I have taken all this trouble, woven all these meshes,
and gathered them in my hand; one jerk, and the net closes over the
head of the stone-mason; he and the sweet nymph struggle therein,
defenceless, powerless, and best of all, without a right. Emperor and
Church can look on whilst thou seizest the bird, and I the land. Not
that it is valuable; but it rounds off my fields here. I can then more
easily sell the whole to a great lord in Italy."

"I also do not intend to keep the fragile creature long; only through
the autumn and winter. When the slave-dealers come here in summer from
Antioch, I shall sell her at a high price. This half-bluish white of
the eyes is much sought for. Whence has she it?"

"From Hellas or Ionia. Her parents were slaves of a Greek trader in
purple, who died here on the return journey from Pannonia. They declare
that the old man set them free before his death; they then carried on a
little trade in salt. When they also died, the child became the wife of
their neighbour's son, the stone-mason, who had grown up with her. I am
eager to know if they have preserved the letter of emancipation. If
not, then good-night, Felicitas! We are now at our goal; the foot-path
here turns down, from the main road towards the Mercurius Hill.
Moderate, I beseech thee, the violence and the eagerness in thine eyes,
or thou wilt spoil all."

"I have not been born or trained to wait."

Thereupon the Tribune approached the open entrance of the garden. Zeno
followed slowly. The setting sun threw its beams fully on the
threshold-stone and the newly-cut inscription.

"Hic habitat Felicitas!" read the Tribune. "For yet how long?" asked
he, laughing.

"Nihil mali intret!" concluded the merchant. "It is well that wishes
are not bolts."

"Or _we_ should not come in!" said the other; and he trod scornfully
with a quick step on the neat letters. These were rubbed smooth as a
mirror with fresh oil. Leo's foot slipped, he staggered, tried to
recover himself, stumbled again, and fell with a cry of pain on the
stone slab, helmet and armour loudly rattling.




                              CHAPTER III.


Immediately, before his companion could stretch forth a hand to help
him, the enraged man had tried to rise, but with a wild curse he sank
again to the ground, and repelled vehemently the attempt of the other
to assist him.

"Let me lie; the foot is broken or the ankle is sprained. No, it is the
knee. I do not know. But I cannot stand--I must be carried."

"I will call the people of the house. The stone-mason is coming
already."

"I will strike him dead if he touches me. I will have no help from him.
On the other side of the road to the left I saw some of my people
spear-throwing on the drill-ground. Call them to me, they shall carry
me away."

And this was done.

While the money-changer had gone for the soldiers Fulvius came forward,
but the Tribune turned away from him and would not speak; silent,
suppressing any utterance of pain, he was carried by the strong Moors
into the town, where they soon obtained a litter and took him to the
Capitol.

In the meanwhile Fulvius had stopped the merchant at the entrance. "Not
over the threshold, most excellent man!" said he, pushing him back. "I
am superstitious; thou hast an evil look. As soon as I caught sight of
thee and the Tribune I hastened to meet you, bringing the money which
lies in that bag ready counted for thee. Here"----and he began to count
out the silver money on the broad coping of the low wall. "Here, count
then! It is reckoned correctly: fifty solidi principal, and at thirty
per cent, interest, fifteen solidi more. And here--for I cannot
transact business with thee without a receipt--on this wax tablet I
have written the acquittance. Take the style, put thy name to it, and
go thy way, never to return."

But with his lean hand Zeno pushed back disdainfully the silver pieces,
so that they fell rattling on the stone slab and rolled round about.

"We do not separate so quickly, hospitable landlord and grateful
debtor."

"Grateful! Thirty per cent, is, I think, thanks enough, and one is not
hospitable to harpies and vampires. Take what belongs to thee and go!"

"When I have taken that which belongs to me," answered the Byzantiner
fiercely, "then, not I, but _thou_, wilt go out of this house--out of
this whole property."

"What does that mean?"

"That means, that my business is not merely with the fifty miserable
solidi with interest. Thou art my debtor for more than twenty times
that sum; mine is the house, mine the whole possession, most probably
thyself also, at this moment, with every bone in thy body; mine also
that slave daughter, who peeps anxiously there between the curtains,
with the child at her breast. Mother-sheep and lamb are my own."

So maliciously were these words uttered, at first lightly whispered,
then in rising anger, ever louder and more threatening, that Fulvius,
alarmed, looked back to see if his young wife had perceived this
disaster.

But Felicitas had again disappeared behind the curtain, satisfied that
the wild officer, whom she feared, she knew not why, was no longer
there. She knew well that the money was ready for the usurer.

Smiling, she bade farewell to her guest, who had emptied his beaker and
now took his departure. Not a cloud overshadowed her white brow as she
now sat down on the couch, and with a sweet smile on her maiden-like
countenance raised the waking child, and proceeded to give it
nourishment.

Zeno still delaying, Fulvius in fear and anger pushed him with his
elbow a step farther from the entrance; the muscles of his naked arms
tightened, his hands clenched; threatening but speechless, he stood
before the man who had spoken such fearful words.

Crispus now came forward; he seized his young nephew firmly by the
wrist of his right arm, which he was slowly raising for a blow.

"What means this?" cried the fat uncle, anxiously.

Fulvius spoke not a word.

But Zeno answered: "This means, that I have bought this property from
the Imperial Exchequer, with all the old claims for State taxes, and
seven times the rent due to the Emperor, for which, according to the
accounts, this tenant and his father are many decades in arrear; this
makes, together with the fines, a debt of seven thousand solidi."

Crispus calculated in an instant that if even he gave his whole
possessions to save his nephew, they would not amount to a seventh part
of this sum.

"That means," continued Zeno, "that as there is no doubt about the
inability of the debtor to pay, I claim him as my slave for debt, and
shall to-morrow be installed by the magistrate into the property."

"Oh, Felicitas!" groaned Fulvius.

"Be calm; I will take mother and child home with me till the suit is
decided," comforted the good-natured uncle.

"Law-suit?" laughed Zeno. "A suit that begins with its accomplishment
is quickly decided. My claim is indubitably shown by the Imperial
tax-rolls; they give positive evidence, and that young creature"----

"Wilt thou also claim the wife for the debt of her husband? That is not
Roman justice," cried Crispus.

"Stay with thy ridiculous statues, and do not teach me justice and its
ways. The young wife is a slave-child, the property of the master of
her parents. This man died without a will, without assignable heirs.
His property fell to the Exchequer; to the Exchequer belonged the
parents and belongs the child."

"The old Krates set the parents and the child free before his death."

"Where is the letter of emancipation?"

And when both were silent the usurer continued in a triumphant tone:
"You are silent? It is, then, as I suspected: the papyrus was destroyed
when her parents' house was burnt in the rising of the people against
the tax-collectors. Her birth as a slave is undisputed, the letter of
emancipation is not forthcoming, therefore she and her slave-brood are
mine."

The young husband was overcome with passion and anguish, and a blow
with his fist on the breast of the villain sent him staggering
backwards. "Hast thou, then, thou old sinner, purchased my wife in
advance from the Fiscus, as thou hast also me and my house?"

"No," said he, exasperated, "the beautiful Greek belongs to a handsome
young lord, who suits her better. A lion will soon drag her to his den.
Thou knowest well what kind of suitor the lion is."

"The Tribune!" cried Fulvius. "I will strangle him first with these
fists; and thou, panderer, take"----

But Crispus slung both arms around him, holding him fast.

So Zeno gained time to make his escape. He quickly mounted the path
which led to the main road; when he had gained the height he turned and
looked through the bushes at the villa. He raised his fist menacingly,
and cried to the two men, "Woe to the vanquished!"




                              CHAPTER IV.


Crispus then turned to go towards the house.

"What dost thou wish to do?? asked Fulvius.

"To ask Felicitas if there is no writing, no evidence of
emancipation"----but the young husband stopped him.

"No, no! She must know nothing about it. The poor, tender, helpless,
happy child! It would crush her--this horrid plot!"

"How wilt thou prevent her knowing it, when it will to-morrow be
carried out? For I do not doubt it is all correct what the usurer says
of the tax-dues and of his purchase of the property. And that is not
the worst. Thou canst fly, as so many thousand debtors have already, to
the mountains, to the forests, to the barbarians, for aught I care.
Leave him here the heap of stones."

"The house of my parents! the place where we have been so happy!"

"You can be happy elsewhere, when you come together again. But
Felicitas with the infant--she cannot yet share thy flight. She must
stay, and _can_ stay with me. And that, I hope, can be arranged; for I
have no doubt about the emancipation. The old people did not fabricate
it. It is only the evidence that we want--the evidence!"

"The letter of emancipation is burnt; that is certain; burnt with the
few ornaments and savings of the parents. They often told us about it.
They had put all their valuables in a little box of cedar-wood, under
the cushions of the bed, in their own room. In the night that the
despairing tax-debtors and the peasants, the beasts of burden of the
great landlords, had broken out in riot, the old people had, with the
child, hastened into the street to inquire the cause of the fearful
noise. They ran forward to the corner of the Vulcan market. Another
crowd of fighting peasants and soldiers then poured in from behind,
cutting off their return. The wooden storehouses of the small tradesmen
that lived there, were set on fire. It was two days before they could
return to their house, and then it was almost entirely burnt out; under
the half-carbonised cushions of the bed, they found two melted gold
pieces and the iron mounting of the cedar-box, yet glowing, and round
about ashes:--from the wood of the box and its contents."

"The writing was not to be found?"

"In the house of her parents, certainly not; we searched it thoroughly
before we sold it, after the death of the old people."

"Among the records of the Curies?"

"The freedom was given by letter, not by will. Krates intended to leave
a will, but was overtaken by death before he had carried out his
intention."

"Witnesses?"

"There were none. I tell you the freedom was given by letter."

"There is, then, no evidence. It is fearful."

"It makes one despair."

"But what thoughtlessness to live long years without"----

"Long years? It is not yet one year that I have called her mine.
Before that it was the care of the parents; but these good old
people--strangers here--what could they do? They could not awake the
dead master, that he might repeat the emancipation."

"Had no one else read the letter?"

"Possibly! But these could only witness that they had read it, not that
it was genuine."

"I see no escape but in flight--hasty flight."

"Hasty flight with the infant, and the young mother hardly
convalescent, is impossible. And to fly! it is not my custom. Rather
resistance by force."

"Thou, and I, and the lame Philemon, the force against the lancers of
the Tribune! For he stands behind."

"I believe it! I saw his passionate look rest on her--on her neck--I
could throttle him!"

"You are a dead man before you raise a hand against him."

"It is dark, hopeless night around us. Oh, where shall we find counsel,
where a beam of hope, of light?"

"In the Church," spoke softly, but decidedly, a sweet voice. Felicitas
put her arm round the neck of her beloved.

"Thou!"

"Thou here?"

"Yes, as thou didst not come back, I sought for thee; it is always so
between us. The boy sleeps; I laid him in my bed. I found you both so
deep in conversation, that you did not hear my step on the soft garden
sand."

"What hast thou heard?" cried Fulvius, full of fear.

But the radiant, cheerful face, the smooth brow, the happy smile of his
young wife, soon quieted his anxiety.

"I only heard that you wanted light in the darkness, and there came
into my mind, as always, the word 'Church,' the name 'Johannes.'"

Fulvius was satisfied, almost joyful, because she had heard nothing of
the lurking misfortune. He stroked tenderly her beautifully arched
head, and said:

"And yet thou art not one of those devotees whose piety, or rather
hypocrisy, peeps through the knees of their garments, worn threadbare
by the altar steps."

"No; I am, alas, not pious enough. But it does not help me if I do go
often to confession. Johannes always smiles when I have finished, and
says: 'Thou hast only _one_ sin; that is, Falvius.' But when I hear of
darkness and light, I always think of the Church and Johannes. It is an
experience of my earliest childhood," said she slowly, reflectively.

"What experience?" asked Crispus, becoming attentive.

"I had been obliged for many weeks, on account of a disease in the
eyes, to wear a bandage, to remain in darkness, I know not how long. I
was hardly six years old. I then heard the voice of Krates, the master,
who was skilful in medicine, and had himself treated me. 'Take her with
you this evening into the Basilica,' said he, 'it will not hurt her
eyes; and she must be there, so says the law.'"

"What sayest thou? For what purpose?" asked the two men in breathless
eagerness.

"I know not. You forget I was a child. But this stands yet clear before
me: In the evening father and mother took me between them, each holding
one of my hands; the master was also there; and they led me with
bandaged eyes--for the raw evening air of the late autumn might have
hurt them--into the Basilica. Here they took off the bandage and"----

"And now?"

"What didst thou see? What happened?"

"For the first time for months without pain, did my eyes again see the
bright but gentle light. Before the altar, which was lighted with many
wax candles, stood Johannes in shining white garments; the master
placed us all three at the lowest step of the altar, and then spoke a
number of words that I did not understand: the priest blessed us; my
parents wept--but I noticed it was from emotion, not from pain--and
kissed their master's knees; they then again put the bandage on my
eyes, and we went from the light of the church out into the darkness.
Since then light and Church and Johannes are to me one."

Felicitas could not quite understand what now happened to her.

Her husband warmly kissed her brow and eyes, and her uncle almost
crushed her hand.

"Go thou back to the house," cried at last her husband. "We must go
immediately to the church; thou art right--as always. Thou--thou hast
given to us the best, the saving counsel."

And he led her eagerly, with a last kiss, back into the garden.

"It is quite certain," said Crispus, when Fulvius again appeared, "that
it was not only by letter that they were set free; for greater safety
there was the ceremony in the church, before the priest, according to
all the forms of the law. And the child has all unsuspiciously revealed
it to us in our greatest need!"

"And the priest"----

"Was Johannes himself!"

"He yet lives. Thanks be to the holy ones! He can testify to it."

"And he shall: before this night! Before witnesses, before the Curies
shall he verify it! To the church!"

"To Johannes!"

And the two men hastened as fast as feet could carry them, down the
high-road to the town, towards the Porta Vindelica.

In the meanwhile Felicitas went slowly back to the house, often
stopping to look back at her husband until he had disappeared from
view.

"What may they be doing?" said she quietly, bending her beautiful head.
"Well, they are good: the holy ones are with them. The sun is now set
behind Vindelicia. But in the forest the sweet bird still sings his
evening song: how peaceful! how quiet! I will go to the bed of my
little one. I can wait there most calmly; Fulvius will come back before
night. For he loves us--yes, he loves us much, my little son!"

She then entered the house.




                               CHAPTER V.


But Fulvius did not come back that night.

When he and Crispus had passed through the Porta Vindelica, and had
turned into the Via Augustana, in which stood the church of Saint Peter
and the little house of the priest, they noticed Zeno, who was knocking
at the door of a magnificent building at the other end of the street.
It was the house of the Judge.

"He is using despatch," said Crispus. "It is well that we are already
here." And he touched the knocker, which in shape like a cross hung on
the small door of the priest's house.

"He will manage all through the Judge, who is his son-in-law," said
Fulvius, anxiously.

"And deeply indebted to the usurer. That holds everything together,
like sticky mud."

The door was opened, and a slave led them through a long, narrow
passage, dimly lighted by an oil lamp in a little niche in the wall, to
the room of the priest; drew back the curtain, and ushered in the two
guests.

The half-dark room was almost void of furniture: the lid of a large
chest served as a table, on it stood writing materials; on the walls
one saw a lamb, a fish, a dove, very roughly sketched and painted a red
colour.

Johannes, although in conversation with two priests, immediately turned
towards them; a meagre form, upright, in spite of his seventy years, by
the force of a strong, enthusiastic will; a gray Capuchin dress, tied
round the loins with a cord, was all his attire; a silver ring of white
hair, which shone like a nimbus, encircled his head. A long white beard
fell low on his breast.

"A moment's patience, dear friends," said he. "The business of my
brothers here is urgent; you see, they have the traveller's hat and
staff--but it will soon be concluded. Thou, Timotheus, wilt return
to-night to thy post. It is well that thou hast given the warning; but
only the hireling forsakes his flock, the good shepherd remains
constant to it."

"I go," said the one addressed, a young subdeacon, blushing quite
abashed: "I certainly did not wish to run away from the barbarians--I
only wished"----

"To give a warning, certainly. And then, perhaps, the spirit of
cowardice suggested this to thee--that Johannes would keep thee here
within the safe walls of this fortress. But I say to thee: 'Except the
Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.' And if the
troubles of war come over the poor people out there, thy consolations
will be needed. Go with God, my son, back to thy cell at Isunisca."

"Are the barbarians already so near?" cried Crispus, alarmed.

"Apparently; at least, brother Timotheus heard, three nights ago,
horsemen ride by his cell with unshod steeds. Those were not Romans."

"They were the night-riders, the gods of the heathen, led by Wotan, the
devil chief, whom our fathers named Teutates, but the Romans
Mercurius," said Bojorix, the deacon, an older man, and he trembled for
fear.

"Hardly," said Johannes, with a quiet smile, "for afterwards in clear
day, one of these night-phantoms, with a long flowing gray beard, and
clad in a wolf's skin, dashed into a company of armed merchants at the
bridge across the Inn, seized the largest wine-skin from the waggon,
threw it on his horse, and rode away. Spectres do not drink this year's
Räter wine. This news from the _west_ disturbs me less than the absence
of news from the _east_--from Ovilava and Lentia! There certainly came
from there, through the Porta Latina, a few peasants into the market;
but I did not know them: I was suspicious of them. Well, we stand in
the protection of the Lord, in the rising as in the setting of the sun!
But thou, Stephen"----

But he who was addressed heard not.

Gently rebuking him, the Presbyter took hold of his garment: "Stephen,
Stephen, dost thou still understand only the barbarian name Bojorix?
Thou, my Stephen, say to the children of the widow at Foutes: I will
pledge the silver vessels of the church, keeping back only one for use,
and with the proceeds satisfy the money-lender, and save her from
slavery. I will bring the money to-morrow, or the day following."

"O, sir, they are so anxious. Why not tonight?"

"To-night I must bind afresh the wounds of the poor leprous Jew, whom
the doctors will no more touch, and watch by him. Go now, both of you,
my brethren: and may the Angel of the Lord who led Tobias hover around
your traveller's staff. Fear not, although it is night: you walk in
light."

Reverently saluting, they departed; Johannes refused the kiss that they
wished to press on his hand.

"And now to you, my friends," said he; "what can I do for you?"

With haste and excitement, each supplementing the other, they laid
their anxieties before the priest; he listened gravely, attentively.

"It is," said he then, "as my dear penitent has said. Krates, the
master, set free the parents and the child: before me, in this
Basilica."

"Oh, then we are safe from that base man!" rejoiced Fulvius.

"So long as I live: but I am an old man; this night the Lord may call
me. Haste is necessary against this profligate. Yon knew Galla, the
child of Gaudentius, who lives near to the tax-office. She was
eighteen years old. It was only a few days ago. The villain saw her at
mid-day:--before night she had disappeared:--next morning she lay
shattered at the foot of the rock of the Capitol;--it was said she had
met with an accident while gathering berries--but a fisherman, who was
drawing his nets at daybreak, confided to me that he saw her throw
herself from the tower-window."

"The Tribune lives there!" cried Crispus.

Fulvius, speechless, grasped at the hammer in his tunic.

"Come! The Judge, the Curies will not take any declaration so late.
They are feasting and carousing. We will seek out the elders of the
congregation: I will swear before them my knowledge of the
emancipation. And I will to-night consider with thee if we cannot
protect thy wife's innocence, and also thyself and thy inheritance,
brave stone-mason, against this usurer. Follow me."

They hastened all three into the street. It was still tolerably light;
the twilight of the long Jane evening only very gradually deepened. As
they reached the house of the Judge, the outer door opened: the master
came out escorting the money-dealer.

"I will," said he, "send there early to-morrow. Thy right is undoubted;
and as the flight of the debtor is probable, I will issue the
warrant--but there he stands before us."

Zeno turned towards the street and saw the three men approaching; it
displeased him to see his victim in company with the priest, whom the
burghers loved, whom he feared and hated. He greeted him coldly; there
were other people in the street, it would have injured himself to
refuse one so honoured a greeting, but he wished to pass by him
quickly.

"Halt, Zeno of Byzantium!" cried the priest aloud--and one would not
have credited the old man with this strength of voice--"I have to warn
thee, thee and that voluptuous Tribune. I know too well of your sins:
the measure is full. If you do not repent, I cannot longer suffer you
in the fellowship of the saints." The merchant grew pale. "A usurer
thou art; and he--he is a murderer of body and soul. You will not carry
it out. Know that, if the letter is burnt, the pure wife shall not be
given up to you. She is free--set free before me in the church."

"Thou canst easily say that," said Zeno, with a crafty look.

"I go to swear it before witnesses."

"Then no one knows it except the old man," thought the other.

"But thou who takest thirty and more per cent., I will bring thee to
account before the congregation. And not for that alone. Think of thy
poor Syrian slave! I will also accuse thee, on her account, before the
secular tribunal." The Byzantian trembled. "And thou and that
commander-in-chief of lust and power, if you cannot clear yourselves
from the blood of Galla, I will expel you next Sunday from the Church."

Before Zeno could answer there was a clang of weapons and the sound of
heavy steps, and a company of the Tribune's Isaurians turned the
corner. The centurion hastened to the merchant:

"I seek thee! I was directed from thy house here, to the Judge. Read!
From the Tribune!"

Zeno took the small wax tablet, "Open?" asked he suspiciously.

"Sealed for us," laughed the soldier; "we do not read; we only fight."

Zeno read: "It was only the knee. My Greek slave has by friction
reduced the swelling. I shall to-morrow again mount my horse.
Threefold, if thou gettest the woman to-morrow!"

The Greek exchanged a quick look with the Judge; he then, with the
reverse end of the style, rubbed the tablet smooth, effacing the
writing, turned the style and wrote:

"The priest alone knows that she was set free. On Sunday he denounces
thee publicly. Dead dogs do not bark."

"Take that to thy Tribune," said he to the centurion.

"I cannot. I go on guard at the Vindelician gate. But here, Arsakes, go
back to the Capitol."

He gave the tablet to one of the soldiers, who saluted and disappeared.

"At the Vindelician gate? Wait, then!" And Zeno whispered a word to the
Judge.

"Halt, centurion!" cried the latter, "My Carcerarii are not within
call; in case of necessity I can exercise authority over you warriors,
according to the law of the Emperor Diocletian. Seize that debtor of
the state, whose escape is suspected, and take him to the prison for
tax-debtors; it stands by the Vindelician gate."

Fulvius was in a moment surrounded; the centurion laid hold of his
shoulder, four men seized his arms.

"Oh, Felicitas!" sighed he, utterly helpless.

"I will save her! I will go to her immediately!" cried Crispus, and he
hastened away.

He was about to turn the comer, when there sounded suddenly the
hoof-strokes of a horseman riding along in mad haste, followed by a
tumultuous crowd: soldiers, burghers, women, children--all pell-mell.

"One of our Moorish horsemen!" cried the centurion, as he caught the
horse's bridle. "Jarbas! Comrade in arms! What is the matter?"

The rider, who was dripping with water, raised himself high in the
saddle; he had lost helmet and shield, he held a broken spear in his
right hand, blood streamed over his naked left arm.

"Tell the Tribune," cried he in a hoarse voice, as if making a last
effort. "I can do no more--the arrow in my neck--they are there--close
the gates--the Germans stand before the town!" And dropping the bridle,
he fell backwards from his horse.

He was dead!




                              CHAPTER VI.


Was it actually so? Did the Germans stand indeed before the gates of
Juvavum?

The burghers racked their brains in tormenting uncertainty. They could
learn nothing more at present of what had happened without the walls;
the mouth that might have given farther information was silent for
ever.

The gates were kept carefully shut. When the news first reached the
Capitol, Leo, the Tribune, had sprung from his couch, "To horse!" cried
he; "out, before the walls!" But with a cry of pain he had sunk back in
the arms of his slave; and he did not wish to entrust to another the
dangerous enterprise of a nightly reconnaissance outside the gates,
against an enemy certainly far superior in numbers. Severus, the
commander of the volunteers in the town, had only infantry at his
disposal. With these alone, he could not and would not advance against
the barbarians in the night. He contented himself with occupying the
towers and gates. The strengthened guard on the ramparts watched and
listened attentively in the mild night air; but there was nothing
unusual to be observed, no light in the neighbourhood, no camp-fires in
the distance, which the advancing Germans, with wives and children,
men-servants and maidens, with herds, carts and waggons, certainly
could not dispense with, and which it was not their custom to
extinguish either from prudence or fear. No noise was heard, neither
the clang of arms, nor the hoof-strokes of horses; only the regular,
gentle murmuring of the stream, which hastened through the valley from
south to north, struck on the ears of the watchers. A burgher once
thought he heard a noise in the direction of the river, like the gentle
neighing of a horse, and a splash of the waves, as if a heavy body had
fallen or sprung into the stream; but he convinced himself that he had
been deceived, for everything remained still as before.

The nightingales sang in the bushes around the villas; their
undisturbed song testified, as one rightly judged, that neither
waggons, horses, nor warriors were in movement there.

So to gain information they turned again to the corpse of the horseman,
and to his steed, yet trembling in every limb.

They saw that the horse had swum the stream, man and horse were running
with water. Why had not the fugitive made use of the bridge below the
town? Because he did not know if it were occupied? or because he did
not wish to do so? Because he had striven to bring his news the most
direct road? He had no other wound than that in the neck, caused by the
deadly arrow, from which the blood had flowed over his shoulder and
shieldless left arm. It was undoubtedly a missile like those the
Germans carried; the three-barbed point had entered very deeply, the
shot was given at a close range; the long shaft of alder-wood was
winged with the feathers of the gray heron; the blade of his long
cavalry sword was missing, the leather sheath hung empty at the right
side of his girth; the spear, which the closed right hand still
grasped, was broken at the first iron clasp by which the point was
attached, by a powerful blow from a battle-axe, not from a sword; so
that the rider had lost in close combat, helmet, shield, sword, and
spear, and in flight had received the arrow shot by his pursuer. The
dead man could be questioned no more.

But what had become of his comrades in arms?

Leo, the Tribune, had the day before sent out five of the Moorish
cavalry to take possession of a hill, two hours' journey north-west of
the town, which commanded a view of the country as far as the thick
forest to the north. A half-fallen watch-tower stood there, which had
last been repaired and occupied in the time of the Emperor Valentinian
I., now a hundred years ago.

What had become of the other four Moors?

Nobody knew.



The citizens passed an anxious night. The watch went their rounds on
the ramparts with torches, and small fires burnt at the spots where
broad flagstones covered the surface of the earth and turf.

The fires were extinguished at dawn of the early June morning; the
sentinels looked carefully out into the country in the full morning
light; there was nowhere a trace of the enemy.

Peasants came as usual from all parts into the town to sell or to buy.
They were astonished to find the gates closed. They were allowed to
pass in singly, all being carefully examined to see if they were
trustworthy people or spies, perhaps even barbarians in disguise.

But the inoffensive peasants were terrified at this unusual sharpness
of the gate-watch; to question them was without rhyme or reason. They
evidently knew nothing, and were much more zealous and anxious to
inquire in the town what had taken place.

From the north-west, in the direction of Vindelicia, from which the
approach of the barbarians was expected, the country people had come
in, as usual, in numbers; they had observed nothing suspicious. But
from the south-east hardly anyone came. It excited no remark, few
villas and houses lay that way, and it was only seldom that a
frequenter of the market came from thence. One might have considered
the fright of the previous evening as a dream, only the dead horseman
was a silent witness to its actuality.

The first hours of the day passed away without any threatening
indications; there was no enemy visible even in the far distance; the
bridge over the Ivarus below the town (a second joined the two banks
within the walls) was seen to be unoccupied.

As the Tribune was still kept a prisoner in the Capitol by the accident
to his knee, Severus ordered the Vindelician gate to be opened; he went
with a company to the bridge, caused the end on the left, western bank
to be barricaded with pieces of rock and timber, left there thirty
spearmen and slingers, and then returned to the town quite satisfied
that there was no trace of the enemy. But the old soldier did not relax
his watchfulness; he ordered the gates to be kept closed and the towers
garrisoned, and any occurrence was to be notified immediately to him in
the Bath of Amphitrite, whither he now went, to wash away the cares of
the night and the heat and dust of the march.

After having fully enjoyed the bath, he sat comfortably on the soft
woollen rug covering the marble seat, which formed a semicircle around
the porphyry bath, rubbing now arms, and now legs, from the hip to the
knee.

This man of about fifty-five years was a model of healthy and vigorous
strength; his limbs showed that the practice of the hunt and gymnastics
had developed the power of his strongly-formed body.

He now ceased his movements, and sank gradually into deep thought. His
head fell deeper and deeper on his breast; at last he extended his
right arm and began to draw figures in the clean white sand, which
covered the space between the marble seat and the edge of the bath.

"Must rank our men still deeper against the German wedge," murmured he
to himself. "Ten men--twelve men deep. No, they don't waver yet. And
yet--it must be just a question of arithmetic to defeat these Germans.
It is only a problem of stroke and counter-stroke. Who may solve it? It
would be best"----

"It would be best," broke in gently a melancholy voice, "that we lay in
our last long sleep, where there is no longer either stroke or
counterstroke."

Severus turned; the white woollen curtain of the inner bath was moved
aside; a handsome man in the strength of youth, and fully armed, stood
behind it.

"Thou, Cornelius! What meanest thou?"

"Thou knowest my meaning. The best for man is not to have been born."

"Shame on thee! thirty years old, and already so tired of life."

"Shame on _thee_! Nearly sixty years, and still so foolishly fond of
life."

"What dost thou bring?"

"Advice: evacuate the town, all the citizens to the Capitol. An express
messenger over the Alps for help."

"Thou seest spectres!"

"Ah! If I saw only _them_! But I see the Germans!"

"There is no trace of them far and wide."

"It is exactly that which is mysterious. They must be near, quite near;
and no one knows where they are."

"_Why_ must they be quite near?"

"Because the gray heron does not go southwards in the month of June;
and because he never flies so low."

"What has that to say to it?"

"I will tell you. I was making the midnight round to relieve the guard
at the Porta Latina. From the battlements of the tower I looked out
sharply into the night. Nothing was to be seen, and nothing to be
heard, except the song of the nightingale. Then suddenly I heard the
cry of the gray heron."

"They are not numerous here," said Severus; "but they do appear in the
stagnant waters and in the marshes of the Ivarus."

"Certainly; but the cry did not come from the river; it sounded on this
side of the stream, out of the mountain forest."

"Making an eyrie there, perhaps."

"It was the _migratory call_. And they migrate in August. And after the
first call there was a second, a third, a fourth answer, till the
sounds died away in the distance."

"The echo from the hills!"

"That is conceivable. But the cry did not come from high in the air; it
came from below, from the ground, up to me on the battlements of the
tower. The heron does not fish at night."

The old man smiled pleasantly. "Do, my Cornelius, believe the old
huntsman. It fishes at night when it has a brood to feed. I have myself
caught one in the morning in the fishing-net which I had set the
evening before."

"But that arrow was winged with the feathers of the--gray heron. And as
often as the heron called, there answered still deeper out of the
eastern forest the shrill cry of the black eagle."

"Accident! And how could the Germans come here from the east? From the
west, from Vindelicia only, could the Alemanni come, who are the
nearest Germans to us. How could they have crossed the river unnoticed,
unless they have wings, like the gray heron himself? Foresight is very
praiseworthy, my young friend, and thou seest I am not wanting in
vigilance. But thou art too anxious; youth and age have exchanged their
_rôle_, I know," hastened Severus to add, as an angry look flashed
across the handsome face of the young man, "I know Cornelius Ambiorix
is only anxious for Rome, not for himself."

"Why should I be anxious about a life that has no charm and no value?"
asked the other, again composed, and sitting down by the old man. "The
philosophy of the sceptics has destroyed the old gods for us; and I
cannot believe in the Jew of Nazareth. A blind fate guides the world.
Rome--my pride, my dream--sinks, sinks irretrievably."

"Thou errest there," answered the other, quite composed. "I would
to-day throw myself on this sword"--he grasped the weapon which lay
near him on a cushion--"if I shared thy belief. But this sword--it is
inherited from my imperial ancestor, Probus--gives me always fresh
encouragement. Nine German kings knelt before that hero's tent, when he
drew this sword out of the scabbard, and commanded the trembling ones,
according to their own custom, to swear allegiance by the sword. And
they swore it."

"That is long ago."

"And with this sword is also bequeathed in our family the oracular
promise: 'This sword is conqueror in every battle.' It has been proved
in many generations of our house. I myself, while I was allowed to
serve, had defeated the Germans in twenty battles and fights, with this
sword." And the old man pressed the weapon tenderly to his breast.

"Pardon, if I correct thee," said the young man, smiling sadly; "not
with this sword, but with Isaurians, Moors, Illyrians, and, most of
all, with Germans, hast thou other Germans conquered. Rome, Latium,
Italy has no more men. There are no more Romans. Celtic blood flows in
my veins, Dacian in thine. And why canst thou no longer serve? Because
thou hast often conquered, the mistrustful Emperor has taken the
general's staff from thy hand, and in gratitude for thy services sent
thee here in honourable banishment."

"It was very--undeserved," said Severus, rising; "but no matter! I can
be of use to the Roman state here also."

"Too late!" sighed the other. "_Fuimus Troes!_ It is over with us. Asia
to the Parthians, Europe to the Germans, and to us--destruction. It
seems to me that each people, as each man, lives out its life. Twelve
centuries have gone by since Romulus was suckled by the she-wolf. We
must allow that she had good milk--the venerable beast--and the wolf's
blood in our veins has lasted long. But now it is diseased, and the
baptismal water has utterly ruined it. How can the government of the
world be maintained, when hardly any Roman marries, and the few
children that are born are not suckled by the mothers, while these
broad-hipped German women are filling the land with their numerous
progeny. They literally eat us up, these forest people; they dispossess
us from the earth more through their chaste fruitfulness than by their
deadly courage. Three hundred and forty thousand Goths did the Emperor
Claudius destroy; in four years after there stood four hundred thousand
in the field. They grow like the heads of the Hydra. And we have no
Hercules. I have had enough of it. I shall bring it to an end in the
next battle. One does not suffer long after a blow from a German
battle-axe."

Severus seized the hand of the young man who had spoken so bitterly. "I
honour thy sorrow, Cornelius, but thou shouldest act according to thy
own words: thy Thalamos stands empty; thou must again make Hymen sound
forth under the gray pillars."

"Ha!" laughed the young man fiercely, "that a second Emperor may entice
away from me a second spouse, as a bishop the first bride, an Emperor
the first wife led astray? No! truly there are no more Romans; but
still fewer Roman women. Pleasure, love of ornament, and love of power,
are the three Graces whom they invoke. Have you ever heard that the
priests among these barbarians befool the young girls? or their kings
entice wives from the hearths of their free husbands? I have not. But a
people without gods, without native warriors, without true wives,
without children--such a people can no longer live. A people that has
every reason to tremble before its own slaves, ten times more numerous
than itself! If thou hadst only seen the murderous dark looks with
which the slaves of Zeno, the usurer, threatened their lord and the
slave-master, as they were just now driven in chains through the
street! But I myself? How stands it with me? I have been everywhere,
and held many different offices in Rome, in Ravenna, in Byzantium:
soldier, magistrate, writer--all with success; and yet I found it
all--vain, hollow. I have tried everything, it is all naught. Now,
returned home to the town of my fathers, I find it ruled by a usurer
from Byzantium and a sensualist and brawler from Mauritania; and the
only one who still makes any opposition to this alliance, is not
_thou_, and not _I_; we are only two honourable Romans! no: a Christian
priest, whose fatherland, as he boasts, is not the Roman Empire, but
heaven!--I have had enough of it!--I say it again: a people without
gods, without wives, without mothers, without children--a people whose
battles are fought by levied barbarians--such a people can no longer
live! It must die; and that soon. Come, then, come, ye Alemanni! I
cannot swallow hemlock. I will fall with the clang of the tuba, and
imagine that I am falling under Camillus or Scipio."

Cornelius was wildly excited. Severus seized him by both shoulders:

"Promise me not to seek death until you see the next battle lost, and
that you will be willing to live if we conquer."

Cornelius nodded, sadly smiling, "I think I can boldly promise that.
Thou and thy conquering sword--you will no longer keep back the quickly
approaching ruin."

At this moment a shrill blast from the tuba struck on their ear. The
curtain of the inner bath was torn aside; an armed burgher rushed in
and cried: "Hasten, Severus; now they are coming. German horsemen are
galloping hither out of the western forest on the other side of the
river!"




                              CHAPTER VII.


With the help of the messenger and the bath attendants, Severus was
quickly armed. Accompanied by Cornelius he hastened to the Vindelician
gate, there to mount the high wall, which afforded a prospect far and
wide. The exertion made him very hot, for it was now mid-day; the
burning rays of the sun fell vertically on his heavy helmet.

At the gate he was met by a centurion of the Tribune; Leo had already
seen from the Capitol the horsemen swarming out of the western forest.
He sent word there were only about a hundred Germans: he would himself
immediately lead his cavalry to the gates, for he was able again to
mount his horse.

Severus ordered the soldier to follow him for the moment on to the
walls. With Cornelius he looked intently over the plain, which
stretched from the left farther bank of the river as far as the western
forest.

After long observation he turned. He was about to speak to Cornelius;
but his eyes fell on two country people who were anxiously looking in
the same direction.

"Now," said he, "Geta, how could you be so foolish? You swore by all
the saints that you had seen no trace of the enemy. Your cottages lie
on the other side of the western forest. And now the barbarians lie
hidden between you and the town! Were you blind and deaf?"

"Or did you _wish_ to be so?" interposed Cornelius mistrustfully.
"Consider," warned he, "they have every reason to support the
barbarians; rough and passionate these may be, but they do not press
the last marrow out of the bones of their bondmen, like the imperial
fiscal."

But the elder of the two peasants answered: "No, sir, I am no traitor.
I do not support the barbarians. Have I not served under the great
Aëtius and received an honourable discharge and this little property?
Believe an old legionary; and if you do not believe me, keep me here as
a hostage till it is decided. Only yesterday I and my nephew were
boiling pitch in the west forest--the traders from Ravenna give a high
price for it. The whole forest is not five miles in breadth; if there
had been many barbarians hiding themselves there, we must have seen
them; it cannot be a migrating horde, an army of people; it can only be
adventurers, a few horsemen who are reconnoitring to see how the
country is protected."

"We will show them how it is protected," cried Severus, and he raised
his right hand menacingly. "The veteran is right, Cornelius. I believe
him. It is only that handful of riders over by the river that is
capering towards us. We will drench them for their insolence. Himilco,
back to the Tribune. I decline the help of his Moors--hearest thou? I
decline it altogether; it is a case of honour, to show these robbers
that the burghers of Juvavum alone are men enough to chastise them."

"I fully agree with you," said Cornelius. "It can only be a party of
scouts."

"I shall, notwithstanding, be cautious, and make the attack with an
overpowering force; this time I _must_ conquer--on account of thy vow,
my Cornelius."

He struck him on the shoulder with fatherly kindness, and descended the
narrow flight of steps from the walls. Having reached the gate, he
commanded the tuba-blower to hasten through all the quarters of the
town, and summon the burghers to the Vindelician gate: in a quarter of
an hour would the attack be made. Loud sounded the imperative tones in
all parts of the town, and from every street the armed volunteers
streamed forth to the north-western gate. One of the first was the fat
Crispus, who came panting from his workshop hard by. He toiled along
under an immense spear and shield. It was hot, and Crispus was old and
corpulent. On his head, instead of a helmet, he carried a cooking
utensil, in which, in peaceful times, the old Ancilla was accustomed to
bake the--only too greasy--festival cakes! It was certainly now scoured
quite bright, but it was somewhat too large, and at each step rattled
about his ears. He did not present a very warlike appearance.

Severus observed him with a shake of the head. "Now the will is
good"----

"And the flesh is not weak!" mocked Cornelius.

"But," continued Severus, "I would rather see thy slim nephew, the
stone-mason. Why does he deny his arm to the Fatherland? Always with
his young wife? Where is he?"

"Here he is!" cried an entreating voice high above their heads.

Crispus had not had time to answer--had only pointed towards the tower
at the gate; and behind the barred window of the second story, Fulvius
was to be seen eagerly stretching forth both hands.

"Let me out, O general! Help me down, and with the spear I will thank
thee!"

"Severus," said Crispus eagerly to the astonished general, "order the
gaoler--there he stands, in the doorway--to release him; Zeno the
usurer has caused him to be imprisoned."

"Bring the man out, Carcerarius!" commanded Severus. "I need such a
strong youthful arm. Let him pay first his debt to the Fatherland.
Should he fall, he will be free from every debt; should he survive, he
will return to the tower."

The gaoler hesitated; but a blow in the ribs which Cornelius
impatiently dealt him altered his opinion.

"I yield to force!" cried he, rubbing the assaulted spot.

"What an iron, strictly obedient Roman soul!" exclaimed Cornelius.

Immediately afterwards Fulvius sprang over the threshold, seized the
shield and spear which were brought to him from the store of arms on
the ramparts, and cried:

"Out! out before the gate!"

Well pleased, the eye of the general rested on him.

"I praise such zeal! Thou longest for the battle?"

"Ah, no, sir," answered the young man ingenuously, "only for
Felicitas."

While Severus turned away vexed, Crispus comforted his nephew.

"I have been watching thy house from the wall. Compose thyself, no
barbarian has yet crossed the river."

"And the Tribune?" whispered the young husband.

"Has not yet left the Capitol"

"And Zeno?"

"Is fully occupied in bringing his treasures into the town and hiding
them."

Then the tuba-blowers returned from their rounds the last citizens from
the most distant houses arrived.

Severus and Cornelius drew them up in two companies, each of about
three hundred men. Then the old hero stood before them and said:

"Romans! Men of Juvavum! Follow me! Out before the gate, and woe to the
barbarians!"

He expected loud applause, but all were silent.

One man alone stepped from the ranks, and said anxiously:

"May I ask a question?"

"Ask!" answered Severus, displeased.

"How many barbarians may there be out there?"

"Hardly one hundred."

"And we are six hundred!" said this bold one, smiling comfortably and
turning to his fellow-citizens. "To the gate!" cried he suddenly,
striking his sword on the shield. "To the gate! And woe to the
barbarians!"

"Woe to the barbarians!" cried now the whole troop.

The gate was drawn up, and over the drawbridge, which at the same time
fell across the moat, the men hastened out of the town.

Very few guards were left on the walls. Women and children now hurried
from their houses, mounted the ramparts, and looked after their dear
ones, who at a quick march were advancing towards the bridge below the
town, the west end of which, as we have seen, had been in the morning
barricaded and occupied by a small troop.




                             CHAPTER VIII.


At mid-day, when the Alemannian horsemen had first become visible, Leo
the Tribune was lying in his richly-furnished chamber in the high tower
of the Capitol, on a soft couch over which was spread a lion's skin. He
felt in his best mood.

His knee pained and hindered him no longer.

He comfortably stroked the rich black beard which encircled a
face--bronze-brown, small, originally nobly formed, but long since
become terrible by passions.

Before him, on a table of citron-wood, there stood, half-emptied, a
large jug of fiery Siculer wine, and a silver drinking-cup.

Two Greek slaves, father and son, were in attendance on him.

The elder slave, raising his finger in warning, brought the mixing-cup.
But, laughing, his master put it aside. "North of the Alps," said he,
"nature herself mixes too much coldness in our blood; we do not need to
dilute the wine. Is it not so, my demure Antinoüs? There, drink!" And
he offered the cup to a third servant, a handsome boy of some fifteen
years, who was crouching on the ground in the extreme corner of the
room, as far as possible from Leo, and turning his back to his master.
He wore only a purple petticoat round his loins. His other garments the
Tribune had stripped off, that he might gaze on his splendid limbs.
Without turning his beautiful, sad face, the prisoner shook his head,
round which flowed long golden hair.

Defiantly, threateningly, he then spoke: "My name is not Antinoüs; my
name is Hortari. Set me free! let me go back to my own people in the
rustling forests of the Danube! or else kill me! For know this,
shameful man, never will I comply with thy orders."

Leo angrily threw at him the heavy fortress-key, which lay on an
ottoman near. "Depart hence, stubborn dog! Davus!" cried he to the
younger slave, who was engaged in putting ready the armour of the
Tribune, "drag him to the stable, and hang him there in chains! If the
brat will not be his master's plaything, away with him to the beasts!"

The boy sprang up and threw his woollen mantle around him.

Davus dragged him away. The look, full of deadly hate, which the young
German threw back, quickly turning as he passed out of the room, Leo
did not observe. He soon recovered his good-humour.

"To-morrow I shall have better company here in the Thalamos," said he,
again stroking his dark beard, "than an untamable young bear.
Felicitas! I drink to our first embrace!" And he emptied the cup.

Then he stood up. "I need a support no longer!" He thereupon motioned
away the elder slave, stepped to the window of the tower, and looked
out.

"There is not a hundred of them, these daring barbarians! What
insolence! Only a few wear defensive armour; and their weapons of
attack are pitiable. How many of their arrows, spears, battle-axes have
already splintered harmlessly on my helmet and armour! They are coming
straight towards me. I long for battle and victory! There is life down
there in the streets of the town. Severus is gathering his cobblers and
tinkers. But they will not get the better of the impetuous enemy. When
the old man, who is playing the general, is in the greatest distress--I
will let him struggle a good while as a punishment--then will I ride
out with my cavalry like the storm of the desert, and sweep them before
me. But first to the priest. No one in the town is now thinking of
anything but the barbarians outside the gates. So I can accomplish it
unnoticed. The danger from that priest must be very threatening, when
the cowardly gold-sack himself counsels bloody means. He has ever
menaced me, the psalm-whiner. First security and revenge, then the
pleasure of victory, and for a reward--Felicitas. Let Pluto be
saddled," commanded he the old slave, "and help me to arm."

The old man took the order to the court below, and then returned to the
tower. Leo had already put on the tall helmet with its flowing plume,
and the splendid greaves, and the slave now helped his master to clasp
and buckle over the dark-red tunic the magnificent breast-armour, which
was adorned with many orders and distinctions. When Leo had girded on
the sword, and was going to take the bronze shield, with the long,
sharp spike in the centre, the old man took carefully from a small
ivory box, which stood in the corner near the couch, a narrow leather
strap with two diminutive appendages, and with an entreating, silent,
impressively eloquent look, offered the charm to his master. It was a
small, ugly idol in amber, and a tiny silver case.

"Take it, my lord!" entreated the Greek, as Leo contemptuously pushed
it away.

"What shall I do with that? What sort of"----

"Do not revile them," implored the old man; "or they will be malicious
and protect no longer. Dost thou not know them, the guarding jewels?
The one is the Egyptian god, Phtha, and the capsule encloses a hair of
the beard of the Apostle Paul. If the first does not help, the second
will. Wear to-day both. I had last night a bad dream."

"_Thou_ wear them, then!"

"The dream did not concern me, but thee, my lord. I saw thee
celebrating a marriage!"

"Oh, that thou seest often! This time with Felicitas?"

"No, with Persephone, the queen of shades."

"She is no doubt very beautiful," laughed the Tribune, spreading out
his powerful arms; "let her only approach, she is welcome!"

"May the omen be far distant!" cried the slave.

"Thou art very anxious about me! Does my life concern thee? Why? Say,
for what reason?"

"Oh, sir, thou wast never so angry with Chrysos as"----

"With all the others, wilt thou say?" laughed the Moor. "Only
self-interest, old man; I need thee; that is, thy healing knowledge and
fingers."

"If thou wouldst only pray! And some one creature on the earth,
love--some one name honour! It would be better for thee!"

But the soldier gave a shrill laugh: "Love? Do I not every month love
another woman?"

"Thou destroyest what thou lovest!"

"And pray? To which god shall I pray? With the same fervour and with
the same results, have I seen prayer offered to Astarte and Artemis, to
Osiris and Jupiter, to Christ and Jehovah. But honour? What can be
sacred to me? Hardly so old as that German youth, I was stolen by
Vandal horsemen. Then lost I home, parents for ever! Sold as a
slave to the Romans, I suffered and enjoyed, even as a boy, things
unspeakable--pampered, kissed, fed, whipped. I slew my last master,
escaped into the forests of Calabria, became robber, robber-chief; was
taken, condemned to the sports in the circus, pardoned by the Emperor
when even my blood reddened the arena, placed among the mercenaries,
soon by wild courage centurion and Tribune. To which god shall I pray?
They all forsook me when I believed in them. But since I scorn them
all, Fortune serves me like a beloved maid. And what shall I love and
honour? My palm-rustling home? That is occupied by Vandalic barbarians!
Rome? Rome at first ill-treated me like a captive beast of prey, and
now hunts me like a tamed lion against her enemies. Very well; the
nature as well as the name of this my terrible countryman have I
chosen;" and he patted the proudly-maned head of the desert-king on his
couch. "Booty, enjoyment, battle! Wine, war, women! And at last--no
awakening--eternal night in the silent waste of death!" With that he
seized both amulets, threw them from the tower window, grasped his
spear, which was resting against the wall, and went clanging down the
steep tower staircase.

The Greek followed sadly.

Having reached the wide court-yard, the Tribune commanded his troops to
mount; he ordered the squadron to follow him into the town, and station
themselves in the Forum of Hercules, there to wait till, he should lead
them to the attack. The centurion Himilco, in command of the Isaurian
foot-soldiers, was placed at the look-out post at the entrance of the
Capitol, to watch the progress of the battle and any possible events in
the town; and if his presence was required in the town or outside the
walls, he must first close the strong gate of the citadel, and leave
two guards there. The Tribune quietly ordered his two slaves, the old
Greek and his son, to the foot of the Capitol with a closed litter:
"under any circumstances," added he. "To drag on horseback a struggling
woman up the steep path--that might oblige me seriously to hurt her--as
in Galla's case," said he to himself. And now, having given all his
commands, he placed his foot in the stirrup, to swing himself on Pluto,
his magnificent black Spanish steed, which had, with the front hoof,
been impatiently striking sparks from the granite pavement. He was
hardly in the saddle when, through the open stable-door, his eye fell
on the boy Hortari, who, with outstretched arms, was chained to the
wall between two iron horse-racks. In a corner of the stable lay a
round blue German shield, a spear, and a battle-axe, the weapons that
had been taken from the boy at his seizure.

"Ha! the future Antinoüs!" laughed he, fixing his spear at his side.
"Unchain him! He shall go on the walls, and see the destruction of his
German heroes. At night we will chain him with a whole pack of such
bears."

And he gave his steed the spurs, so that he started loudly neighing.
"Beware of the bears of the forest," cried Hortari, now unchained, and
stepping to the door of the stable with flashing eyes; "their claws
will tear you in pieces."

But the Tribune, with a laugh, shouted: "Up! to the gate! and woe to
the barbarians!"

And, following their powerful leader, the glittering cavalcade galloped
off, rushing and clashing down the valley.




                              CHAPTER IX.


With less cheerfulness than the Tribune, had his confederate Zeno
received the news of the appearance of the Germans before the town.

He owned many estates outside the gates, managed by slaves and
slave-women, who might take this opportunity, as the oppressed often do
in such cases, to run away to the barbarians, and with them make good
their escape.

Although he was no patron of art, and was too prudent to leave
treasures outside the fortress, yet his villas contained much valuable
furniture and other household goods. There were also herds of cattle,
sheep, and swine, which he would very unwillingly have bestowed on the
robbers.

Therefore, in the early hours of the morning, when Severus went out to
reconnoitre and to take possession of the bridge over the Ivarus, Zeno
sent out, under the protection of this troop, his slave-master, himself
an emancipated slave, with a gang of armed men, to bring in from the
houses which lay, at all events, on this side of the river, the most
valuable effects. The slaves especially belonging to those properties
were to be led into the town--if necessary by force. These peasants and
herdsmen, always rougher, wilder, more insubordinate than the town
servants, had only obeyed with reluctance; on two estates the unhappy
creatures had resisted, but were overpowered by superior numbers and
bound with chains to each other. The slave-master swung incessantly
over them the many-lashed leather scourge, urging them to haste, and to
burden themselves with still heavier loads, which they balanced on
their heads.

In a long train, those that were chained in the centre, cattle and
sheep forward, armed slaves at each side, the overseers at the head and
end of the line, they now came back through the Vindelician gate, which
was immediately closed behind them.

"Forward, Thrax, thou old dog!" cried Calvus, the overseer--he was
considered Zeno's son by a slave-woman--to a white-haired old man who
staggered under a load of bronze vessels; and as from feebleness he
could not hasten his steps, Calvus struck him a severe blow on the back
with the flat of his sword-blade.

The old man cried aloud and stumbled to the ground.

A gigantic neatherd, who was very heavily chained--he had resisted
furiously, and still bled from several wounds--then halted; he thereby
stopped the progress of all who were chained to him.

"I pray thee, Calvus, spare my father! Give his basket to me."

"Wait, Këix, thou cursed Thracian, I will give thee that which is thy
due," cried Calvus, and struck him with the edge of the sword over head
and shoulder, so that the blood spouted out. He was silent; not a cry
of pain escaped his tightly-pressed lips. But Calvus continued: "Thou
hast risen in open rebellion; we might have thee quartered for it. But
it would be losing too much capital to kill such a beast, that we have
fed for thirty years. Patience, my little son! I shall try on thee the
new torture instrument which the master has procured from Byzantium.
That shall be my refreshing evening's amusement."

The strong Thracian grew pale; but with anger, not fear. He only cast a
look at his persecutor, and again strode forwards.

While some of the servants distributed the herds in the town stabling,
the chained slaves were taken by Calvus to the court of the master's
house in the Via Augustana, to receive their punishment.

"Do with them as thou wilt," said Zeno in his writing-chamber, reading
through the list of the rescued property, "only take care that the life
and value, that means the power to work of these wretches, does not
suffer thereby. Previous to mutilation, we must, according to the law
of the pious Constantine, obtain the sentence of the Judge. I will ask
my son-in-law. Mucius," and he smiled; "but, with a slight modification
of the law, _afterwards_. Now I shall go to the Bath of Amphitrite to
inquire the news."

While he, accompanied by Calvus, was passing through the court, his
eyes fell on old Thrax, who lay in the comer on some straw; quite
exhausted, he had sunk into a deep sleep; by him, leaning against the
wall, was his giant son, heavily chained; blood still trickled from his
wounds. Zeno thrust at the sleeper with his staff; the old man opened
his tired eyes:

"Ah, am I still alive? I dreamt that the Lord had called me! I walked
in Paradise! But on the earth also I belong to the Lord Christ!"

"Then thy Lord Christ shall feed thee," mocked Zeno. "Calvus, that old
man is good for nothing. Withdraw from him the wine and bacon. It is
useless to feed him." His look then met the eye of the son, who grasped
his chains in rage.

Zeno was alarmed.

"Listen, Calvus," whispered he; "that one there, after he has been
tortured, let him be sold. He makes me uneasy. He has the look of our
black bull immediately before it went mad. Away with him to the mines
of the Fiscus! They need there such strong scoundrels, and the lead
soon poisons. Now to the bath!"

With that he went out of the court. He had hardly crossed the threshold
of his house, when a lame slave hobbled in, who very much resembled the
powerful-limbed Këix; it was his elder brother. But he did not seem to
notice either the old father or the brother streaming with blood; he
limped towards Calvus, and said, deeply bending:

"My master, Mucius the Judge, sends you this writing. Zeno and thou,
you are accused before him, by Johannes the priest, of having scourged
the Syrian woman, so that the unborn child died. He says he can this
time only with difficulty acquit you."

The writing was long; while Calvus read it with a knitted brow, the
lame man glided silently to his brother and pressed a file into his
hand; it was wrapped in a strip of papyrus. Këix read: "After the
mid-day meal." With his chained hand he lifted the small strip to his
mouth and swallowed it.

The lame man stood again behind Calvus. "What answer, sir?"

Highly displeased, Calvus gave him back the indictment. "May Orkus
swallow up this priest! He knows everything that does not concern him.
I must myself speak with thy master. Go on! Thou limpest horribly,
Kottys," laughed he. "But the expedient has been successful. We sold
thee to the Judge as incorrigible. But since thy new master has cut thy
sinews for thee, thou hast not again attempted to escape, and art
become tame, quite tame." They then both left the court.



In an hour Zeno returned from the bath. As he crossed the courtyard,
all the slaves, chained and unchained, were sitting at their scanty
meal, consisting of small pieces of coarse barley-bread, onions, and
bad wine, sour as vinegar. He went into his writing-room to his
accounts.

There, as was well known, no one dared disturb him.

This room--alone in the house--had instead of curtains a strong wooden
door, which could be locked.

The low window looked on a narrow lane, not on the principal street.

He soon noticed an unusual noise, as of the screaming and running of
many men in the distance. The door then opened gently. Astonished,
displeased at the intrusion, Zeno turned.

He was still more astonished to see old Thrax standing upon the
threshold, who shut the door carefully, turned the key, and laid his
finger on his lips, warning silence, for his master had angrily given a
cry of displeasure.

"Flee, master! Quick! Through the window! Thou art a dead man if they
seize thee."

"Who? Are the barbarians in the town?"

"Thy slaves; they are in revolt; all, in the whole town. They will be
here immediately."

Horror seized the Byzantian. He was well aware what vengeance he had
heaped up against himself. From the courtyard the wild cry already rang
in his ears. He seized a large bag of gold pieces, and a little purse
full of precious stones which lay before him on the counter of slate;
he had been in the act of counting them. The old man pushed a stool to
the window to help him to mount. Zeno started; it was with astonishment
that he saw the old man actively engaged about his escape. "Why doest
thou this for me?"

The slave answered solemnly: "I do it for the sake of the Saviour;
Johannes has taught me that my Lord Christ has said: 'Reward evil with
good.'"

"But whither, whither shall I flee?"

"To the church! There is safety. Johannes will protect thee."

"Johannes!"

Zeno wondered if the Tribune had already carried out his bloody
counsel. His knees shook. He was not able to climb the low breastwork
of the window.

Nearer and nearer sounded the uproar.

He heard the voice of Calvus. "Mercy! mercy!" he cried.

Immediately afterwards was heard a heavy fall.

"Alas!" groaned Zeno, now at last lifted up by the slave to the window.
"If they guess my hiding-place!"

"Master, no one knows it but myself, and I"----

"Thou shalt never betray me!" cried the Byzantian, and he seized the
dagger in his tunic, thrust it to the haft in the neck of the old man,
and swung himself into the street.




                               CHAPTER X.


Meanwhile the straggle outside the gates was being decided.

The barbarians some eighty horsemen, had several times approached the
river, but never within bow-shot; they had also trotted towards the
blockaded bridge, but had made no attack on that strong position. The
eyes of the people on the ramparts and of the attacking party were
directed intently towards this enemy in the _west_.

When the bridge was reached Severus ordered a small opening to be made
in the barricade, through which only two men at a time could gain the
left bank, and now, as the two last of the long train of burghers
passed through--the bridge was still occupied by its original
garrison--there sounded from the hills of the eastern forest, from the
_right_ bank, the piercing cry of the black eagle.

Cornelius quickly turned and looked towards the east. "Heardest thou
the cry of the eagle?"

Severus nodded. "A good omen for Roman warriors! Seest thou how our
golden eagle on the standard seems to raise its wings?"

But Cornelius did not look at the standard-bearer; he looked only
towards the eastern forest. "A column of smoke rises up from the
chamois rock."

"A charcoal-burner! Turn thy face! In the _west_ stands the enemy.
Lower the spears! Forward!"

In two extended lines near each other, each three men deep, they now
advanced towards the agile horsemen, who had quickly ridden back from
the river as this mass of footmen passed over; they had halted half-way
between the stream and the western forest, and had formed in two
parallel lines. Only a spear's throw separated the enemies.

Then as Severus and Cornelius, slowly advancing their columns, were
just going to raise their spears, two Germans rode slowly towards them,
ceremoniously turning the points of their lances downwards.

"Halt!" cried Severus to his troops. "They wish to parley. Let us
listen to them!"

The two horsemen came now quite close to Severus and Cornelius. The
combatants on each side stood back in anxious expectation.

One of the two Germans, a youthful, towering, splendid figure, on a
milk-white steed, was by the ornaments and splendour of his arms
characterised as a leader; he might be more than ten years younger than
Cornelius, who noticed with envy the muscular strength of the naked
right arm of the young barbarian, adorned and at the same time
strengthened by broad golden armlets; the left arm was covered by a
small round shield, painted red, embellished in the centre with a
spokeless wheel, a Rune or a picture of the sun. His breast was
protected by splendidly-worked armour--ah! with feelings of anger
Severus recognised, by the badges of honour appended thereto, that it
had been the panoply of a distinguished Roman officer, a legate or
_magister militum_;--he wore short leather breeches; from the ankle
upwards the calf of the leg was bound round with neat leather straps;
the left only of the two closely-fitting wooden shoes bore a spur; the
rider scorned saddle and stirrups; a short double axe was stuck in his
girdle, a white woollen mantle, fastened together so that it hindered
no movement, hung at his back; it was the hand of the mother--for this
youth was certainly yet unwedded--who had worked the handsome, broad,
bright red stripe on its border; splendid light golden hair floated on
his shoulders in natural curls, and surrounded the dazzlingly
beautiful, maidenlike white face; and on the proudly arched Roman
helmet, also obtained by plunder, towered, instead of the Latin black
horse-tail, the pinion of the gray heron.

The second horseman, a gigantic, gray-haired man of about sixty years,
with a gray beard falling low on his breast and waving in the wind,
seemed to be the leader o£ the retinue of his chief. He was simply
dressed and armed; the mane and tail of his powerful war-horse, a brown
stallion, were prettily interwoven with red and yellow ribbons; on his
shoulders he wore the skin of a wolf, whose open jaws yawned at the
enemy from the top of his helmet; his shield was painted in red and
yellow circles; at his unarmed breast he carried a mighty horn of the
bison of the primeval forest.

The commander now raised his lowered spear, threw it into the
bridle-hand, and offered the right to Severus, who took it with
hesitation, and immediately let it fall.

"First a grasp of the hand," cried the German, with a soft,
richly-toned voice, in very good Vulgate Latin--"first a grasp of the
hand, then, if you so wish it, a stroke with the sword. I know thee;
thou art the brave Severus, formerly the _Magister Militum_. Thou art
gallantly continuing the struggle at a lost post, for a lost cause. I
pride myself in being the son of the hero Liutbert, king of the
Alemanni. My name is Liuthari, and no man has yet conquered me."

Severus frowned darkly. "I have heard of thy father's name, and of
thine, you have stormed Augusta Vindelicorum."

"But not retained possession of it," cried the king's son; and his
clear gray eyes shone pleasantly. "Who would wish to live in walled
graves? Also in your Juvavum we shall not settle."

"That is provided against," muttered Severus.

But Liuthari threw back his locks, laughing.

"Wait a little! But say first, for whom leadest thou these burghers
into the field? In whose name dost thou defend Juvavum?"

"For the Imperator of Ravenna, who, as a good omen, unites the names of
the first king and the first emperor; for Romulus Augustulus, the lord
of the whole earth."

Then the German drew a papyrus roll from his girdle, and threw it to
Cornelius.

"I thought so," said he. "You know less than we barbarians what is
happening in your own Italy--in your own imperial chief city. Read what
is written to me by one who knows it well. There is no longer an
Emperor of the West! Romulus Augustulus--the boy's name is certainly a
good omen _for us_!--is deposed. He lives henceforth on an island, and
feeds peacocks; and on his throne sits my brother-in-law, the husband
of my beautiful sister--Odoacer the brave. He has himself written it to
us."

Cornelius had glanced through the composition. He tamed pale and
silently gave it to Severus, who read it trembling.

"There is no doubt!" said he, almost voiceless. "I know the man; he has
served under me. Odoacer does not lie."

"And we do not lie!" cried the gray-bearded companion of Liuthari. He
urged on his horse and took the letter from the hand of Severus. "To
split shields, not to falsify Runes, have I taught King Liutbert's
son."

One could well believe that of the old man. Before he put the roll into
his girdle he looked into it with an important air; it did not disturb
him that the letters were upside down.

Severus supported himself on his spear. Cornelius looked darkly before
him. "I knew it," he then said. "I had almost wished for it when I saw
it was unavoidable; and now it is come it crushes me."

"No longer an Imperator in Rome!" groaned Severus.

"Italy in the hands of the barbarians!" sighed Cornelius.

"You awake my deepest pity, gallant heroes," said the king's son, in a
grave tone. "But now you see well: the battle must come to an end
before it begins. For whom, for what will you yet fight?"

"For the future!" cried Severus.

"For the past--for honour!" cried Cornelius.

"For immortal Rome!" said both.

"Byzantium yet rules--soon will Byzantium send another Emperor,"
threatened Severus.

"Perhaps!" said Liuthari, shrugging his shoulders. "But in the meantime
we want a settling-place, fields, and pasturage, we Germans. And
therefore I bring you a message in my father's name: 'So speaks
Liutbert, the King of the Alemanni, in his own name and in that of his
allies'"----

"Who are these allies?" interrupted Cornelius.

"You will find out quicker than you will like," answered gruffly
Liuthari's companion.

Liuthari continued: "'Let him stay in the land who will do so
peaceably; he who will not stay let him peaceably retire. The
fortresses to be vacated; they must be destroyed. Two-thirds of the
land remain to you; one-third is for us.' That is a reasonable
division."

But Severus started up angrily, raising his spear. "Bold barbarian!
Darest thou thus to speak, with eighty barbarians against the host of
Juvavum's burghers? Thou hast learnt to speak as a Latin, but not to
think as a Roman!"

"I should think," interposed Cornelius, "that your country was large
enough for you, ye Alemanni, when you can only send eighty horsemen to
conquer Juvavum. Do you think I can yield to _you_?"

A peculiar smile played around the young German's handsome mouth, about
which the first downy beard charmingly curled. "Take care, Roman! Are
we too few for thee? Soon may we seem too many. Out of a few the
wonder-working Wotan wakes many! For the last time--evacuate the
fortress; divide peaceably the country!"

"Never! Back, barbarian!" cried the two Romans at once.

Liuthari turned his horse suddenly round. "It is your wish. You are,
then, lost. Wotan has you all!"

The two horsemen then galloped back to their men.

"Haduwalt, sound the horn!"

The old master-in-arms put the horn to his mouth, and a load roaring
tone struck on the ear of the Romans; and before they could obey the
command of their leaders and advance against the enemy, there sounded
behind them, _in the east_, from the river, from the town, now quite
near, the loud cry of the black eagle; and immediately afterwards such
a fearful noise of whoops, cries of anguish, and the clashing of
weapons, that all the six hundred men, and both commanders, turned in
dismay. Horror and despair seized them. Germans--Germans innumerable,
as it appeared to the alarmed Romans rushed forth from the eastern
forest, and from all the slopes of the mountains and brushwood of the
hills. A strong detachment hurried towards the bridge; others, on horse
and on foot, threw themselves into the river above and below the
bridge; but the greater part, laden with ladders and trunks of trees on
which the horizontal branches had been left, approached the town; and
with fierce rage the shut-out citizens saw how whole masses of the
stormers, crowding together like ants, helped to raise each other,
supported themselves on the ladders, beams, and trees, climbed up, and,
in many places almost without resistance from the few sentinels, at
once gained the crown of the ramparts.

Juvavum, the town, was conquered before its defenders had been able to
strike a blow.

The garrison had been enticed out, with the exception of the soldiers
of the Tribune. Were _they_ still in the Capitol? The leaders looked
anxiously towards the tower: the imperial _Vexillum_ was still
fluttering at its summit.

But the cry of joy with which the Alemannian horsemen greeted the
success of their heroic confederates recalled the Romans to the
threatening danger from this near enemy. Severus ordered Cornelius,
with about a hundred men, to engage the Alemannian troopers, while he
himself, with the greater part of the deeply discouraged burghers,
turned back to the bridge, to assist its garrison, which was now being
attacked from the unprotected open east side.

He again heard the sound of Haduwalt's horn. Severus turned.

"Yield!" cried the king's son. "You are lost!"

"Never!" cried Cornelius, and threw his spear as Liuthari was galloping
towards him.

Liuthari turned the stroke aside with his shield arm: the next instant
Cornelius fell backwards, pierced to the heart through shield and
armour by the lance of the German hurled while at full speed.

"I will avenge thee!" cried Severus, and was turning towards the king's
son; but at the same moment a cry of distress again called him
eastwards.

The enemy had overpowered the garrison of the bridge; already many of
the swimmers, horsemen and footmen intermixed, had reached the troops
of Severus. Active youths, whose yellow hair floated in the wind from
their uncovered heads, ran, holding on to the manes of the horses; and
thus attacked at once by horse and foot, the citizens of Juvavum,
knowing their town, their relatives, were already in the power of the
conqueror, threw away their arms, and fled on all sides. At the same
time the Alemanni from the west rode down the hundred men of Cornelius.

Severus stood alone: his spear fell from his hand.

The leader of the enemy that had come so suddenly from the east then
approached him. He had galloped in advance of his followers on to the
bridge, where his horse was pierced and fell. He then advanced on foot,
a giant in stature. The mighty pinion of the black eagle bristled
menacingly on his helm; his red hair, combed towards the crown, and
drawn together behind, fell below his helmet; an enormous bear-skin
hung on his shoulders: he raised his stone battle-axe.

"Throw down thy sword, old man, and live," cried this giant, in Latin.

"Throw down this sword?" said Severus. "I will not live!"

"Then die!" cried the other, and hurled his stone axe.

Severus fell: his breast-plate was rent in twain, it fell in two pieces
from his body.

He supported himself painfully on his left arm: the conquering sword he
had not yet let fall.

The victor bent over him, picking up his axe.

"Tell me, before I die," said Severus, with a weak voice, "in whose
hands is Juvavum fallen? Of what race are you? Are you Alemanni?"

"No, Roman; we have been summoned by the Alemanni. We do not come from
the west. We come from the east, up the Danube. We have taken all the
Roman towns from Carnuntum hither; the last legion this side of the
Alps have we defeated at Vindobona. We share the land with our comrades
the Alemanni--the Licus is the boundary. Look here; already from the
mountains of the east our people stream down into the country--women
and children, waggons and herds--that is the advanced guard; tomorrow
will come the great horde."

"And what is your name?"

"We were called formerly Marcomanni; but now, 'the men of Bajuhemum,'
the Bajuvaren, all this land is ours for ever, as far as one can see to
the north from the Alpine ridge. Yield, then, gray-head! there yet
remains to thee"----

"This sword," said Severus, and he thrust into his heart the conquering
sword of the Emperor Probus.

The giant drew it out and a stream of blood rushed forth.

"Ah!" said the Bajuvaren. "The old man is dead. It would be a pity,"
continued he slowly, looking at the sword, "if this good blade were
lost. Come, brave weapon; serve henceforth the new lord of the land.
But now must I thank Liuthari; everything hit together admirably. Yes;
these Alemanni! They are almost wiser than we! Hojo, Sigo, Heilo!"
cried he, holding his two hands hollowed before his mouth. "Liuthari!
beloved, where tarriest thou? Garibrand calls, the Bajuvaren duke.
Hojoho! Sigo! Heiloho! Now let us share the booty and the land!"

Liuthari galloped forward and offered his hand to the duke. "Welcome in
our new home! Welcome in victory!" cried he, with a joyous voice.

But then sounded from the town fresh noise of arms and tumult of
battle.

"The victory is not yet complete," said Garibrand, pointing with his
axe to the Capitol.

There was now heard, through the battle-cries of the Bajuvaren in the
town, the clear warlike call of the tuba. "That is the Roman general
and his host!" cried the duke. "He is coming from the fortress down
into the town on my men! Quick! bring me another horse! Into the town!
To the help of my heroes!"




                              CHAPTER XI.


With the exception of the two leaders, very few Romans had fallen in
the short hand-to-hand combat; for the Bajuvaren duke had before the
attack given the order: "To-day--prisoners! No slain! Consider, ye men;
every man slain is a loss, every prisoner a servant gained for the new
masters of the land!"

Fulvius and Crispus had been among the troops turned by Severus against
the Bajuvaren. When their ranks were broken, the nephew cried to the
uncle: "To Felicitas! Through the ford!" and as they had stood
together, so they now ran together towards the river below the bridge,
for that was held by the enemy.

But the stout Crispus, although he had quickly thrown away spear and
shield, was soon left far behind the agile stone-mason.

An Alemannian horseman, with a youth running at his side, followed
both.

Crispus was soon overtaken.

His ridiculous appearance challenged the rider to give him a blow on
the casserole covering his head in the place of a helmet, it fell over
his eyes and nose, from which poured a stream of blood, he gave a loud
cry and fell to the ground; he thought he was dead.

But he soon came back to the agreeable certainty of life, when the
foot-soldier, who had remained by him, roughly tore the casserole from
his head. Crispus sprang up, gasping for breath, the German laughed in
his big, fat, highly-astonished face.

"Ha! this Roman hero has had good provender. And this nose is not red
with its own blood or with water either. Ho, friend, I will set thee
free, if thou wilt reveal to me where in Juvavum the best wine can be
got. It seems to me thou art the man to know it."

Crispus, so pleasantly spoken to, recovered himself quickly, now that
he was quite convinced that he was not dead, and would not have to die
for the fatherland.

He drew a deep breath and spoke, raising his hand as an oath:

"I swear as a Roman burgher, Jaffa, the good Jew, near the Basilica,
has the sweetest. He is not baptized--but neither is his Falernian.

"Excellent!" cried the Alemannian. "Come, ye friends!"--a whole crowd
of Alemanni and Bajuvaren were shaking hands close about him--"to Jaffa
the Jew, to drink our gratitude to the god Ziu for our pleasant
victory! Thou, fat fellow, lead on, and if, contrary to thine oath, it
is sour, this Jew's wine, we will drown thee therein."

But Crispus was not alarmed; he rejoiced, on the contrary, that he
would now be able to drink gratis, as much as he wished, of the
choicest long-stored Cyprus wine, which hitherto had been quite beyond
his means. That it was to be drunk to the honour of the god Ziu did not
make the wine worse. "And," said he to himself, "it is at all events
better pleasing to God that we empty the Jew's wine-skins than those of
a good Christian."

He did not trouble about his house. "They will not interfere with my
old Ancilla; her wrinkles will protect her better than many shields.
The bit of money is buried; they will not carry away the plaster
statues, they will only cut off their noses with great zeal and an
incomprehensible liking for the business: it does not matter, one can
stick them on again," But he was anxious about Fulvius, about
Felicitas.

He looked about for the fugitive, but could not see him either lying
dead, or brought in a prisoner; he seemed to be swallowed up by the
earth: the rider who had pursued him had turned his horse in another
direction, and was pursuing other flying Romans. Crispus hoped that the
young husband had escaped. He (Crispus) was quite unable to help
Felicitas, for his conqueror held him firmly by the shoulder and pushed
him towards the bridge.

"Forward! Thou canst not imagine, Roman, how Alemannian thirst burns.
And near the Basilica, sayest thou? That is right! There we shall find,
besides, gold and silver cups for the liquor."

And in front of the whole noisy, laughing, shouting swarm, the fat
Crispus, an involuntary pot-companion, stumped along as fast as his
short legs could carry him, towards the gate through which he had
shortly before marched, a proud helmeted legionary. He had left the
casserole where it fell, but he was still reminded of it by the
smarting of his nose.

In the meantime Fulvius had actually disappeared. He had not thrown
away shield and spear, like his corpulent companion; he was young,
strong, he had no fear, and he thought of the promise which he had
given at his release to the gallant Severus. He had now reached the
river and stood firmly on the marshy bank. He heard the hoof-strokes of
the galloping horse coming nearer and nearer, and he resolutely turned,
looked at the enemy fiercely, raised his spear, took good aim and threw
it with all the strength of his arm against the face of the German.

"Well aimed!" cried he, as he dropped the reins, and with his left hand
caught the whizzing spear.

The shield of Fulvius would now have availed him little, for the
galloping horseman aimed at the same time with both spears, his own and
the one he had caught, at the Roman's head and abdomen. But before the
deadly lances reached him, Fulvius had suddenly disappeared; in
stepping backwards from the snorting horse, that must the next instant
have prostrated him, he lost his balance, slipped on the smooth grass,
and fell backwards into the stream, the waters of which, dashing up,
closed over him. The Alemannian bent down from his steed and looked
after him laughing as he was carried away.

"Greet the Danube for me" cried he, "when thou hast reached it;" then
turned his horse and galloped across the fields.




                              CHAPTER XII.


Zeno hastily pursuing his way, had reached the corner of the narrow
street.

Loud cries sounded behind him; he looked round; the flames broke
crackling through the roof of a house close by; it was that of the
Judge, his son-in-law. Full of fresh anxiety he hurried forwards.

After a few steps he came to the door of the priest's small house,
which stood open.

He sprang across the threshold, flew along the narrow,
imperfectly-lighted passage. No Ostiarius, no sub-deacon showed
himself. He hurried into the priest's room, the same into which we have
already been.

It was empty.

The door which led into the adjoining church was ajar.

The fugitive entered and hastened across the dimly-lighted space to the
altar, which, dividing apse and nave, furnished the most sacred asylum
in the church. Here on the steps lay Johannes, stretched out
motionless, with both arms clasping the relic-shrine on the altar.

In his anguish new horror seized the hard Byzantian.

Was he murdered?--He, who might perhaps have been able to protect him?

"Woe is me!" groaned he.

His horror increased when he, who lay as dead, slowly raised himself
and silently turned his pale, venerable face.

"Ha! do the dead rise again?" cried Zeno, shrinking back.

"Why dost thou think me dead?" asked Johannes, regarding his disturbed
countenance with a soul-piercing look.

"Not I--not I--but the Tribune wished"----

"I imagined so! What seekest thou here?"

"Safety! safety!" stammered the usurer; he again thought only of the
danger that was following his steps. "My slaves! All the slaves have
revolted. The Judge's house is in flames."

Then a bright light as of fire shone through the open windows of the
church, and arms clashed in the distance.

"Hearest thou? They are seeking me! They come! Save me! Cover me with
thy body. Here, all this gold"--he threw the heavy bag on the altar, it
burst and single gold pieces ran clinking over the steps on to the
marble pavement. "Alas! it escapes from me faithlessly! All this
gold--or the half--no--all, the whole will I give thee--no, not to
_thee_. I know thou wilt devote it to St. Peter, to thy church, to the
poor--only save me!"

And he threw himself at the priest's feet, carefully concealing the
little purse of jewels in his bosom.

Johannes raised him.

"I _will_ save thee!--for Christ's sake, not for the sake of the gold."

"Thou wilt stay with me," cried Zeno with rising hope.

"That I cannot do. My place at this hour is on the battle-field, to
attend on the wounded. My brethren I have already sent out. I was only
deriving strength from a last prayer."

"No, no, I will not let thee go!" cried Zeno, clinging to him.

But, with unlooked-for strength, Johannes freed himself.

"I must, I tell thee. The Lord calls me. Perhaps I may even check the
slaughter. But thou--thy cruelty has so enraged the unhappy creatures,
that some of them would not be restrained by the altar--by my
intercession"----

"Yes, yes!" agreed Zeno.

He thought of Këix, the mad bull.

"Thou shalt be hidden where no one but God the Lord can find thee. See
here!"

With these words he stooped down and raised a slab of the marble
flooring near the altar; a short ladder was visible, which led into a
dark, tolerably spacious vault.

"Go down there. No one but myself knows of this old cave. Wait till I
fetch thee out; I will come as soon as the danger is over."

"But if--and if"----

"Thou meanest if I lose my life? See, thus can the roof-stone be lifted
from below. Hasten!"

"It horrifies me--to be buried alive! Are the bones of the
dead--skeletons----Pardon; are there relics in the vault?"

"Fear thou henceforth the living God, not dead men. Here, take the
oil-lamp; and now away! Hearest thou? The tumult presses nearer."

Then Zeno sprang down, lamp in hand. Johannes seized the money-bag, and
threw it in after him; the miser noticed with agony that the priest had
first taken out a handful of solidi. He replaced the stone, and then
strewed the gold pieces from the principal door, of the church (which
he bolted on the inside) up to the altar, and from there as far as, and
over, the threshold of the door which led from the church into his own
house. He then hastened through this door, and out of his house into
the open air.

After a few minutes, Zeno heard, with a despairing heart, furious
axe-blows thundering on the great door of the church.

It burst open and a great crowd of men--to judge from the voices and
footsteps--crushed in. Zeno held his breath in an agony of fear; he
pressed his ear to the slab, in order to hear better. He perceived
first the voice of a woman.

"Do not kill him in the church!--in the sanctuary of the saints! He
scourged me almost to death, and killed my child. But do not kill him
in the church. Honour the house of the eternal God!"

"Rather in the house of God than in the house of the good Johannes!"
said another voice.

"It is sanctuary only on the altar, not in the whole church!" cried a
third. But then Zeno heard the terrible Këix scream out:

"At the feet of the Father in heaven would I strangle him! He has at
the last murdered my old father, who had entreated me to spare the
monster. When I would not yield, he stole from my side. I found him
again when we had broken open the villain's door, and his dagger was in
my father's neck. I could murder him seven times."

"Once is enough," said Kottys, "if we murder him as slowly as we have
killed my master. Mucius the Judge we have burnt alive in the flames of
his own house."

"Halt! Look here, brother Kottys; this is the track of the fugitive.
The wounded hyena sweats blood; the fleeing miser sweats gold. See
here! at the portal it begins: then he is inside--has drawn the bolt
behind him--here, past the altar has he run; and there--through that
door into the priest's house! There he must be hidden. After him!"

"After him! Down with him!" roared the whole mob, and ran with rambling
steps across the slab over Zeno's head, away into the adjoining house.

The miser, senseless with fright, had crept back into the farthest
corner; long cowered he there; cold sweat ran from his brow.

But all remained quiet, the last sound died away; the pursuers had,
after searching the priest's house, poured out into the street.

He said to himself: "The Tribune will soon observe the conflagration,
and the uproar in the town. He has already repeatedly subdued such
riots. With his lancers he will in a few hours re-establish order."
Thus presence of mind and a certain courage slowly returned to him.

By the light of the oil-lamp, he now looked around him in the
cellar-like vault.

He stumbled against a chest. A strange curiosity, mixed with dread,
impelled him irresistibly to open it; perhaps here the sly old fellow
hid the treasures of his church! He lifted up the lid; the chest
contained nothing but papyrus rolls and parchments; spread over them
was a white, priestly garment with a hood, exactly like that which
Johannes had worn.

An idea struck the fugitive. He hastily drew the wide robe over his own
garments.

"I shall not stay long in this place, and I am now safely
disguised--better than in armour."

After a time, as all remained still, he became uncomfortable in the
damp air of the vault; he carefully half-raised the slab, mounted the
ladder and looked into the empty church.

His eye fell on the glittering gold pieces, which shone in the light of
the altar-lamp.

A few had been picked up by his pursuers, but they thirsted more for
blood than gold. Already the miser repented having promised the priest
so much.

"He, moreover, rejected the gold; so I am no longer bound to give it.
And these scattered pieces--they shall not fall to the scoundrels."

He now lifted the slab quite up, and listened again anxiously. All was
silent.

Then he deliberately placed money-bag and purse of jewels in the chest,
closed the lid, climbed quickly out and picked up the solidi--at first
those that lay nearest, then those by the altar; he then saw to the
right of the altar a whole heap lying together, as they had fallen out
of the burst bag.

He went now from the left of the altar towards the right, stooped
down--oh, horror! he heard steps approaching from the priest's house!
Only one man, certainly, but that was not Johannes--there was the clang
of metal!

He quickly attempted to regain his hiding-place, but before he could
pass the altar, a black shadow fell across his path. Zeno could not,
unnoticed, spring into the vault.

His knees failed him; so, drawing the hood quickly over his head, he
threw himself into the position in which he had found Johannes, with
his arms encircling the relic shrine on the altar. At the same moment
cold steel penetrated his neck. He was dead before he had heard the
words, "Die, priest!"




                             CHAPTER XIII.


But the murderer now thought it was not the high-towering form of the
Presbyter. He bent down so that the black horse-tail of his high helmet
fell forwards, and drew back the hood, and with it the head of the
murdered man.

With a short scream he let it again fall.

"Irony of fate! The usurer! How comes he here? How in this disguise?
Where is the priest?"

But before the Tribune could think about these questions, his whole
attention was drawn towards the chief entrance of the church, by a
noise of the most startling kind.

Leo had stationed his troops in the Forum of Hercules; had left them
with the command there to await his return. He had dismounted, and put
his horse in charge of one of the troopers. He wished to reach the
priest's house on foot, by a circuitous route through narrow streets,
where he would be less observed.

He had been startled when half-way by seeing the flames rise, and
hearing in the distance the tumult of the revolted slaves. He stood
still.

A fleeing woman then hurried towards him, with covered head, he stopped
her.

"It is thou, Tribune!" cried the fugitive.

"What? Thou, Zoë! The Judge's wife! What has happened?"

"The slaves! Our house is burning! Save! help!"

"My troops are standing in the Forum of Hercules. I will return myself
immediately. Then will I help."

He had then hurried into the empty house of the priest, rushing through
it with sword drawn, he reached the Basilica, and instead of him he
sought, had struck dead his own confederate. He had hardly discovered
this, when there sounded in the direction of the portal the bugles and
trumpets of his horsemen, calling to the attack.

"They are in conflict with the rioters," thought the Tribune, and he
was going out through the doorway. "Rascals of slaves! while the
barbarians stand before the gates!"

But on the threshold he suddenly stopped: for quite a different sound
struck on his terrified ear--not the raging howl of frantic slaves; no,
a cry well known to him--the watch-cry, the war-cry, the cry of victory
of the Germans, and--it was close at hand.

"Germans in the town? Impossible!"

But, stepping carefully out from the door of the Basilica, he saw at
the corner of the great square whole swarms, yes, hundreds of Germans,
on foot--not the few horsemen whom they had so long observed--and they
were advancing straight towards the church.

"To fight one's way through! Impossible! Back! through the priest's
house!"

He fled through the nave of the church, past the still raised stone
slab into the house of Johannes. But the noise came towards him in that
direction also, loud laughing and shouting, and he saw approaching a
crowd of Germans with a stout Roman at their head, whom they had
heavily laden with wine-skins.

As quickly as his heavy armour would allow him, he turned back into the
Basilica, sprang--this seemed the only possible place of safety--into
the open vault, pulled down the stone slab, and immediately heard the
Germans pouring into the church through both entrances. Shouting and
exulting the conquerors greeted each other over the head of the
imprisoned commandant of Juvavum.




                              CHAPTER XIV.


We will join the drinking Germans above, rather than the Tribune raging
in impotent wrath below the marble floor.

"Welcome in victory, ye brave Bajuvaren!"

"For that we thank you, ye clever Alemanni!"

"Did we not entice them out well?" said another comrade in arms. "First
of all we--that is, Liuthari, our famous king's famous son, and two of
his followers--surprised a post of five Moorish horsemen, whom the
Tribune of the Capitol had sent out against us as spies. But we know
the forests better than those brown Africans. Four were dead, or
prisoners, before they were aware of it. One escaped--alas! But it
seems he was not able to tell much. Then a little company of us slipped
across the river--an Alemannian horse can swim like a swan--and
galloped to you Bajuvaren in the eastern mountains, in order that at
the right time the call of the heron should be answered by the cry of
the eagle."

"And this time you also, ye heavy-stepping Bajuvaren, contrary to your
manner and custom, actually came at the right time," teased Suomar,
another Alemannian.

Fiercely the Bajuvaren put his hand to the battle-axe in his girdle.
"What does that mean, thou Suevian blockhead? It is my opinion we have
come early enough to cut you down--you as well as all others who wait
long enough! Although you are so quick in thought and hasty in words,
many times already you have not had limbs quick enough for flight, to
escape from us, if we are slow."

Provoked thus, the other was going to answer angrily, but Vestralp, the
first Alemannian, interposed soothingly: "Never mind, both of you;
thou, my Suomar! and thou, brave Marcoman! Once there, the Bajuvaren
fight so splendidly that they make up for lost time."

"They have often shown that!" cried Rando, a third Alemannian.

"The last time," continued Suomar, "just now, in the market-place, and
on the steep path up to the citadel, against the cavalry of the
Tribune."

"Listen! What was that?"

"Yes! did not a groan come out of the ground?"

"There!--at the left by the altar."

"Look! behind the altar! Perhaps some one wounded."

Two warriors hastened to the spot and looked behind the altar, but they
found nothing.

"But what lies there in front--on the steps?"

"A dead man."

"A Roman?"

"A priest, as it seems."

"The slaves must have done that; the rioters who joined themselves to
us when we had climbed the walls," said Helmbert, an aged leader of the
Bajuvaren. "They are now the guides to the richest booty."

"Take the corpse away! On the stone steps is the best place to sit and
drink," said Helmdag, his son.

"Dare to do it, thou blasphemer! That is the table of the most exalted
Lord of Heaven," threatened Rando.

"It is not true," cried Helmdag. "Thou art a Catholic. This is a
heretic church, more harmful than any abominations of heathenism. So my
Gothic godfather, the Bishop of Novi, teaches me."

"Thou stinking Arian!" answered Rando. "Thou denier of Christ! I will
teach thee to give to the Lord Christ equal honour with the Father. I
will fill thy mouth with my fist, and with thine own teeth as well!"

"With us the son always stands behind the father," growled Helmdag.

"Peace! both of you," commanded Vestralp, "fill your mouths with Roman
wine. Bring the skin, Crispus, thou Roman hero! Do not untie it! A
stroke with the sword. So! It spouts like red blood out of wounds! Now
the helmets and hollow shields, until the noble Roman in the buck's
skin is exhausted. And as concerns the strife about the two stone
steps, I think that a good man honours everything that is sacred to
another. Therefore, brothers, we will all draw back from those steps."

"But the gold and silver on the walls, on the pillars and stone
coffers?" said Helmdag, the Arian.

"Perhaps that is to stay for the plundering slaves?" said Rando the
Catholic.

"No!" cried the enlightened pagan, who had spoken for peace--it was
Vestralp, the vanquisher of the helmeted Crispus--"that would be a
pity. We will divide it amongst us all: for the God Ziu, for the Romish
Bishops, and for the followers of Arius."

And they immediately set to work with the bronze helmet, or deer-skin
cap, full of red wine in the left hand, the battle-axe in the right.
Drinking heartily during their work, they broke away from the
sarcophagi, holy shrines, and even from the columns, all that was
valuable of the metal ornaments and jewels, and also the stones that
pleased the eye by their variegated colours.

Garizo, a young, slim, tall Bajuvaren, lifted from the neck of a Saint
Anne her necklace of heavy gold and sapphires, giving at the same time
a deep bow, and saying:

"With thy permission, holy goddess, or whatever else thou mayest be;
but thou art horribly ugly, and of dead stone. What one sees of thy
bosom is yellow; but my bride Albrun is alive and young, and
wonderfully beautiful; and very pretty will these stones look on her
white neck."

"Yes, but where are they then, your women and children, and unarmed
folk?" asked Vestralp of the busy bridegroom.

"They will come to-morrow down the eastern mountains," answered Garizo.
"For this we have at last found out, 'slow-moving' as we are, as thy
hasty-tongued comrade just now said--this we have now learnt: to send
the men forwards into the battle, and let the unarmed come afterwards
when the victory and land is won."

"There must be something in it," laughed Vestralp, "in this name
'slow-moving,' because it vexes you so. If one called you a coward, you
would only laugh and strike him down. You are a strange people! No
other race so calm, and at the same time so terrible in anger."

"I will tell thee," spoke thoughtfully Helmbert, the white-bearded. "We
are like the mountains; they stand quiet, whatever goes on round about
them. But if the tumult within gets too vexatious, they overturn in
rocks and fire."

"You have shown this time that you also can be cunning and crafty,"
cried Suomar. "With what artful care did you prevent the enemy getting
scent of your approach! So sharply did you watch all the roads, and
even the mule-tracks and the paths of the chamois-hunters, that no
intelligence from the east could reach Juvavum."

"And not to make the Romans suspicious at the absence of all news,"
added Helmbert, "we sent our own Roman settlers disguised like peasants
and workmen, as if they were the people from Ovilava and Laureacum,
into the town, there to buy and sell."

"And if these had revealed all?" asked Suomar.

"Their relatives left behind would have been put to death. That was
said plainly enough to them. But besides this, the poor people would
rather support us than their Roman tormentors."

"The burghers of the town soon gave up the contest; they find
themselves under a new rule; as they see, we do not eat them," said
Helmdag, laughing.

"Yes; _only_ the cavalry and foot-soldiers of the Tribune fought
bravely, and with exasperation," said Rando.

"Tell us about it," urged Vestralp. "We, who fought on the other side
of the river, do not know yet exactly what happened within the walls,
or how the citadel fell so quickly."

"By the sword of Ziu, it was wonderful!" began Rando. "There, on the
great square, where the Christian saint stands with lion's skin and
club"----

"_That_ a saint! That is a heathen god!"

"No; a demi-god."

"All the same to me," continued Rando; "he did not help the Romans,
whether saint, or god, or demi-god. But we were surprised on that
market-place. After we, some twenty Alemanni, with the Bajuvaren--they
can climb like cats, these mountain huntsmen of Bajuhemum--had
clambered over the walls, we thought all was over. But when we came to
the open market, there came galloping towards us, in close order, with
the crashing sounds of the tuba, the cavalry of the Tribune. He himself
was not to be seen; it was said, he lay ill in the citadel; but he was
not taken prisoner there. We were at first very few, and it was only
with difficulty that we could stand against them. But we gradually
pressed them back; step by step they were forced upwards towards the
Capitol. But then came the Isaurian infantry to their help, and it was
now a fearful struggle--man against man. Ah! I have again seen them
fight with their Wotan's fury, these Bajuvaren."

"Say, rather, lion's courage," interposed proud Helmdag the Bajuvaren,
"for we carry the lion on our standard, and lion's courage in our
hearts."

"How come you with the southern beast? I think the bear stands nearer,
and more resembles you."

"Thou thinkest that, forsooth, thou sharp-witted Suevian!" said old
Helmbert, coming to his son's help, "because you know so much more than
we; but you do not know everything. Three hundred years ago one had not
heard the name of the Alemanni; but our ancestors, the Marcomanni, had
already long fiercely fought with the Romans. And at that time victory
cradled itself on the wings of the golden eagle. There was, in the
golden house of Nero on the Tiber, a great, wise Emperor skilled in
magic. He had found out, by his magical arts, that if he made two lions
swim across the Danube, the bravest people on the earth would conquer
in the impending battle. But our fathers, the Marcomanni, said: 'What
yellow dogs are these?'--killed the lions with clubs, and afterwards
slew the army of the Emperor and his general: twenty thousand Romans
lay dead on their shields. The clever Emperor in Rome knew then which
was the bravest people on the earth. And since then we carry two lions
on our colours. So sing and tell our bards. Now, continue, Suevian."

"That I will, to your glory! Like cats--or if thou, Helmdag, wouldst
rather hear it, like lions--sprang the Bajuvaren on to the necks of the
Moorish horses, and allowed themselves to be dragged along rather than
let go. 'Give to Loge his due,' says a proverb that I have heard among
the Anglo-Saxons: the Moors and Isaurians fought desperately, man by
man covering the narrow, steep path which only offered space for two
horses. At last the Duke came to our help; he brought fresh troops, and
now in a sudden attack with levelled spears, pushing our way between
the horses, we scattered the whole entangled mass. The Bajuvaren now
used their short knives in a hand-to-hand conflict. They ran under the
long lances of the Isaurians, sprang on to the saddle of the fully
armed Moorish horsemen, and in face and throat--the only vulnerable
part--thrust the blade of their daggers; on both sides, now right, now
left, fell the enemy, horse and man, over the low breastwork of the
Roman wall on to the jagged rocks in the depths below. Nevertheless the
battle might have lasted long around the citadel; indeed, hunger alone
would have subdued those rock walls if the rest of the enemy, who now
at last fled, had gained the gate. But they did _not_ succeed in
getting within it. A great deed was done by the hand of a Bajuvarian
boy; I saw it plainly: having been overtaken by the Bajuvaren, I was,
at last, no longer fighting, but was watching the gate of the fortress,
which, high above me, was distinctly visible. I then saw that one of
the two Isaurians who there stood on guard, ran towards his fleeing
comrades; his movements plainly indicated that he was urging them to
still hastier flight into the fortress, before the barbarians should
press in with them. The other Isaurian stood on the threshold, holding
the iron bolt in his hand, ready to close the half-door from the inside
and draw the bolt as soon as the fugitives had poured in. Then,
suddenly, as if struck by lightning, the man fell forward on his face:
he stood up no more. Immediately afterwards appeared a boy with fair
hair on the tower above the gateway; he cut down with a battle-axe the
imperial purple standard, and in place of the fallen banner planted, on
a tall spear, which shone afar, a blue shield.

"'My Hortari,' then cried Garibrand, the Duke, 'my brother's son,
stolen many weeks ago, and thought dead! _His_ shield, the victorious
blue shield of our house, of our family. Forward, ye Bajuvaren! Now to
cut our way to Hortari!'

"But there was nothing more through which to cut our way; the Tribune
was not there; the slaves of the Tribune were also not to be found in
the fortress: the brave child was the only human being inside the
Capitol. The fight before the gate was over immediately; the enemy shut
out, powerless, one man springing on the back of another trying to
climb the high walls, pressed still harder by us, soon threw down their
arms and yielded. A few certainly, despairing of grace, or despising
it, spurred their horses from the steep path into the abyss below. The
gate of the citadel of Juvavum flew open from the inside, and young
Hortari sprang into his uncle's arms; this youth of the Bajuvaren had
won for his people the Capitol of Juvavum."

"Hail to the youth Hortari! The minstrels will have him in
remembrance!"

"Hail to the youth Hortari!" sounded loud through the wide halls of the
Basilica.

When the joyous cry had died away, quarrelling words were heard at the
farther end of the building.

In the apse behind the altar, two, flushed with wine, were in loud
strife.

In a chest containing Roman memorials, which the zealous Johannes had
taken away from his flock, in order to wean them from their pagan
superstitions, the two men had found a small, beautifully-carved marble
relief, representing the three Graces tenderly clasping each other.
They had seized the piece of sculpture; and screaming and shouting, now
dragged and pulled each other through the church till they stood before
Vestralp and Helmbert.

Then one of the disputants let fall the marble and flashed his short
knife against his opponent, who immediately dropped the plunder and
seized the hand-axe in his girdle.

"Halt, Agilo!" cried Vestralp, seizing the arm of his fellow tribesman.

"Stab _Romans_, if thou wilt, not Alemanni," shouted Helmbert, and
struck down the knife of his countryman.

"Well! You shall decide," cried both disputants with one breath.

"I saw it first," cried the Alemannian. "I wished to hang it on my
favourite horse as a breast-plate."

"But I took it first," retorted the other. "They are the three
fate-spinning sisters. I should hang it up over my child's cradle."

"The strife is easily settled," said Vestralp, picked up the three
Graces from the floor, took the axe from the hand of the Alemannian,
aimed well, and cut the relief exactly through the middle.

Helmbert seized the two pieces and said:

"Forasitzo, Wotan's son, who is the judge in Heligoland, could not have
divided it more evenly; there, each of you has a goddess and a half.
Now go and drink reconciliation."

"We thank you very much," said the combatants, again unanimous and
highly satisfied.

"But there is no more wine," complained the Alemannian.

"Or I should have drunk it long ago," sighed the Bajuvaren.

"Heigh, Crispe, son of Mars and Bellona," cried Vestralp, "where is
there wine--more wine?"

Crispus came panting. "Oh, sir, it is incredible! But they have
actually drunk it all! The prudent Jaffa," whispered he, "has still a
very small skin of the very best; but that is for thee alone, because
thou hast saved my life." He continued aloud: "There is a large stone
jug full of water; if we mix that with the last dregs in the wine-skins
there will still be abundance of drink."

But Vestralp raised his spear-shaft and shattered the great jug so that
the water ran in a stream. "Let the man be cut off from the race of the
Alemanni," cried he, "who at any time mixes water with his wine! That
special wine," continued he quietly to Crispus, "the poor Jew himself
shall keep. Let him drink it himself, after all his fright."

Then there sounded from outside the call of the great ox-horn. And
immediately afterwards the door of the church was thrown open. A
gigantic Bajuvaren stood on the threshold, and cried with a loud voice:
"You are sitting there and drinking in blissful indolence, as if all
was over; and yet the battle is again raging in the streets. The slaves
of the Romans! They are burning and destroying, while the town is
_ours_! Protect your Juvavum, men of Bajuhemum! So commands Garibrand,
the Duke."

In an instant all the Germans had seized their arms, and with the loud
cry, "Defend the Juvavum of the Bajuvaren!" they rushed out of the
church.



When the last footstep had long died away, the marble slab was
carefully raised; the Tribune climbed out. The man so brave, so fond of
war, had suffered the bitterest torments of humiliation during this
long time. Was he not a Roman, and did he not know his duty? It stung
his honour as a soldier that he, blindly following his own passions,
pursuing only his _own_ object, had made the victory so easy for the
barbarians. His looks were sullen; he bit his lips. "My cavalry! the
Capitol! Juvavum! vengeance on the priest! victory! all is lost--except
Felicitas! I will fetch her; and away, away with her over the
Alps!--Where may my Pluto be?"

Leo crept through the priest's house into the narrow street, and
carefully sought the shadow of the houses. It was beginning to get
dark, so long had the drinking bout above his head detained him a
prisoner. Like a slinking beast of prey, stooping at every corner, and
with a spring quickly gaining the side of the opposite street, he
avoided the large open squares and crowded streets. He then heard, in
the distance, the roaring noise of confused voices. He looked back;
flames were rising into the heavens, already darkened with smoke.

The Tribune hastened to gain the north side of the ramparts; to find
the Porta Vindelica unoccupied he could not hope, even from German
recklessness; but he knew the secret mechanism by which, without key, a
small sortie-gate could be opened which led into the high road to
Vindelicia. This doorway he now endeavoured to reach. Unchallenged,
unseen, he mounted the wall, avoiding the steps; opened the door;
closed it again carefully; slid down the steep slope, and gained the
moat, which, formerly filled with water, had now--the sluices were all
destroyed--lain dry for tens of years. Weeds and bushes above a man's
height grew therein.

He had hardly reached the bottom of the moat when a loud neighing
greeted him out of a willow-plot; his faithful horse trotted towards
him, nodding its head.

Two other horses answered out of the bushes.

Immediately afterwards two men crept out of the thicket, crawling along
the ground on all-fours. It was Himilco the centurion, and another
Moor.

They beckoned to him silently to follow them into the hiding-place.
They had escaped into the moat after the dispersion of their troops by
the Bajuvaren. The black steed had followed the two other horses, the
man in charge of him having fallen.

Since then they had remained hidden among the thick bushes of the moat.

"The first gleam of light on this black day," said the Tribune. "We
three will fly! Come! There to the left the river approaches the moat.
The horses can easily reach it with a leap, and then swim across. I
must go to the Mercurius hill, down the Vindelician road; then--over
the mountains!"

"Sir," implored Himilco, "wait till night. Twice already have we tried
to escape by that way. Each time we were observed by the Alemannian
horsemen, who incessantly march before the gates to seize fugitives;
each time it was only with the greatest difficulty that we regained our
shelter. Only in the darkness of the night can we venture."

The Tribune was reluctantly obliged to acknowledge this counsel as
well-grounded. "At night," said he to himself, "I shall be better able
to carry off Felicitas." So, impatient enough, he determined to await
the darkness in this hiding-place.




                              CHAPTER XV.


Far away from the hidden fugitives, in the south-east side of the town,
strife and tumult were meanwhile raging.

Many of the revolted slaves, after revenging themselves on their
masters, had thrown down their arms; but the _wildest_ spirits,
restrained by the Germans from further incendiarism, murder, and
robbery, and driven by them from street to street, had now crowded
together for a last resistance.

Here lay the large imperial magazines for the building of boats and
rafts for the traffic of the Ivarus, especially the salt-trade: also
immense stores of well-dried wood, sail-cloth, pitch, and tar. These
favourites of the fire-god the mad creatures wished to set on fire.
They hoped, in their blind destructive fury, that the conflagration
would from there spread its red and black wings over the whole city.

But the magazines were covered with slates on the flat roofs, were
protected by high stone walls, and shut in with strong oak doors; the
few guards round about had, certainly, long since fled, but, even
undefended, stone and iron-bound wood would for some time resist the
fury of the assailants.

But now came Këix, the leader of the host, from the bath of Amphitrite,
close by, which was in flames, swinging in one hand a blue and in the
other a green pitch torch, such as were used in the illumination of the
ornamental gardens.

"Ha!" cried he; "now see! We will have to-day the richest fire-works!
The Christian emperors have indeed forbidden the Saturnalia, but we
will introduce them again, but this time to the honour of Vulcan and
Chaos!"

And he propped both torches against the oak panels of the door, which
immediately began to smoulder. But now the pursuing Bajuvaren had
reached the spot.

The barricades in the streets they had, after a short, wild conflict
with their defenders, thrown down; and they now rushed forward in a
close wedge with Duke Garibrand at their head.

"We have you, incendiaries! Down with your arms! Extinguish those
flames instantly; or, by the spear of Wotan, no man among you shall
remain alive."

Instead of answering, Kottys lifted up the heavy iron rod--the long
bolt which he had torn from his own slave prison--and screamed:

"Dost thou think we wish to change our masters? We will be free, and
masters ourselves. And all shall be destroyed on this whole earthly
ball that reminds us of the time of our slavery. Come on, ye
barbarians, if you want to fight with desperate men."

And now a furious rage threatened to break forth.

Suddenly a loud, powerful voice cried: "Stop. Peace be with you all!"
Between the combatants stepped the venerable form of Johannes; behind
him appeared his ecclesiastical brethren; they, assisted by some of the
burghers of Juvavum, were carrying on barrows and litters, wounded
slaves, Moors, Isaurians, and also some Germans.

"Make way for us! Let us take these wounded--they belong to you all who
are here fighting--to my church."

The words, the look, had immediately a silencing, an appeasing effect.
At the sign of their Duke, the Bajuvaren lowered their lifted weapons;
most of the slaves did the same. Fearlessly Johannes walked into the
thickest part of the crowd; all reverently shrunk back. The women--for
there were many women amongst the mob--knelt down and kissed the hem of
his garment. He stepped straight towards the door which had now caught
fire.

Kottys alone tried to turn him away.

"Back, priest!" he cried, and threw the iron bar; and as Johannes
quietly walked on, the iron struck him on the shoulder. He sank--his
blood flowed on the ground.

"Woe to thee, brother!" cried Këix. "Thou hast murdered the only
protector of the poor and miserable--our father's best friend!"

And the wild man knelt by the priest, holding him in his arms.

To do this he was obliged to throw away his weapon, an iron trident,
which he had torn from the hand of a Neptune at the fountain. Nearly
all his comrades followed this example. Kottys threw the rod on the
ground, and entreated:

"Pardon me, Father Johannes!"

The priest raised himself. "Thou hast repented, therefore God has
forgiven thee. Who am I--a sinner--that _I_ should forgive?"

He now stepped unhindered to the door, threw down the torches, picked
up one of the broad shields, pressed it with the right hand against the
burning door, raised imploringly the left towards heaven, and said:

"Fire! thou also art a creature and a servant of God the Lord! I
command thee--I adjure thee, thou hellish demon of flame, retire hence
into hell."

The fire was then extinguished. Johannes let the shield fall, and
turned again to the crowd; his face was radiant with the glory of the
deepest conviction.

"A wonder! A miracle of the Lord by the hand of the devout Johannes!"
sounded out from the whole host of slaves. The most defiant now threw
away their weapons and sank on their knees, crossing themselves. Among
the Germans many also made the sign of the cross and bent the knee; but
Këix and Kottys raised their hands towards Johannes as if in worship.
Duke Gariband then advanced to the Presbyter, and spoke slowly:

"Thou hast well done, old man. Here, my hand. But say," continued he,
and a sly smile flashed across his lips, "if thou hadst full confidence
in the magic of the Runic words that thou didst utter to the fire, why
didst thou also use the shield?"

The priest so addressed stood erect and said: "Because we should not
tempt God. Not that the Lord needed my arm or the shield to extinguish
the fire."

"It has never yet happened," said the Duke, thoughtfully nodding his
head, "that one of you Christian priests was at a loss for an answer.
You have--and thou especially hast--power over souls, more than my
sword over the conquered, use it ever as at this time. I know well how
powerful you are, ye men of the cross, on the Danube there rules one,
Severinus by name; he has more authority by his word than Rome and the
barbarians. We shall be good friends; I shall respect thee. But hear
this. I shall allow you to worship Christ as you will; take thou care
not to hinder my people from sacrificing as they will. No, no, old man,
do not shake thy head; I suffer no contradiction!" And he lifted his
finger threateningly.

But undaunted, Johannes said:

"If the Lord will call the wanderers to Himself through my mouth, fear
of thee will not close it. Thy duchess is already won to the Lord.
Verily, I tell thee--thou, and thy people--you will not escape Him. But
you, rise," said he, turning to the slaves. "I will entreat for you
with the victors, who are now the rulers of this land. I will teach
them, that ye also, created in the image of God, are also their
brethren, and that your immortal souls are redeemed by the death of
Christ. I will teach them, that he who sets his slaves free wins the
warmest place in the heart of the Father of heaven."

"But he who has still to remain in servitude," interrupted the Duke,
"let him know, that we Germans are noble-minded masters; we do not
burden and punish the slave according to the caprice and temper of the
master; as our free people are judged by the free, so the bond people
are judged by their fellows--in the court of justice, according to the
law. You stand henceforth under the protection of the strongest
judicial fortress--the law, and the tribunal of your own comrades! So
be comforted: you serve noble masters."




                              CHAPTER XVI.


Soon after the slave insurrection had been quelled in the manner above
described, two Germans walked through the Porta Vindelica on to the
great military road, in the direction of the Mercurius Hill.

"See, the evening twilight is fading and the stars are already
appearing," said the one, and, balancing his spear on his shoulder, he
raised both hands to heaven. "I greet you, ye watchers of Asgard, ye
all-seeing eyes. Send me happiness! I divine that _you_ know," added he
in low tones, "what happiness my heart desires. It aches, this heart--I
think because it is empty."

He then again seized his spear and stepped forwards, his eyes directed
into the mist-veiled distance, as if searching and longing: his white
mantle floating in the wind. He was very handsome, the young son of the
king; and this dreaming manner gave to his noble, serious features a
heart-winning charm.

"If the stars wish to show _me_ what is most pleasing," grumbled his
companion, throwing back his wolfs skin, "let them show me quickly a
wine-shop. It is long, long since I had what I wanted. My throat
smarts, because it is empty, I think. Vestralp and his men, they hit it
off well. Some Christians were in their troop, and, I suppose as a
reward for their faith, the brave Christian Baldur took them into his
church; there, or close by, they found and drank a whole flood of wine,
as if they had been in the halls of Thor. But I have only swallowed a
few drops in a deserted house, where the meal had just been served as
the Bajuvaren forced their way into the town. Listen, their Duke is
right: it is too strict, the way thou dost carry out thy vow."

"Can one interpret a vow, a duty, too strictly, old man? Thou thyself
hast taught me better."

"Truly, thy father made thee swear never to sleep a night in a Roman
town, snaring-pits spread over with nets for noble game the king calls
them--but Juvavum, as Garibrand justly said, is now a town of the
Bajuvaren."

"King Liutbert himself can alone permit me so to interpret the vow. But
be comforted: thou shalt soon drink wine, as much as thou wilt."

"Where?"

"In the house where we will now seek hospitality."

"But in which?"

"For my sake in the nearest, in order to quench thy thirst. Look there,
on the right of the road stands a hill with a house upon it; one can
see the white statues of the gods on the roof, gleaming through the
bushes."

"But down there, to the left of the road, lies another; it seems
larger, more stately, more promising."

"It is all one to me."

"Then we will choose the larger--that on the left."

"But look, there shot a star from heaven! and it fell immediately on
the roof of the house to the right, on the hill. That is a hint from
the gods. I will gladly follow the star. We will go to the house on the
right."

He thereupon sprang from the high road on to the little foot-path that
led to the stonemason's house.

"We shall also come short at the division of the booty, because of thy
foolish strictness," grumbled the old man, following him.

"No," cried Liuthari, "Duke Garibrand will summon me thereto early in
the morning; he promised me that, when he bade us farewell at the
Vindelician gate. Besides, the chief gain of this victory to us is not
a few gold vessels or a tract of land, but that henceforth we have for
our trusty frontier neighbours on the east, instead of the Romans, the
faithful Bajuvaren. It has become too narrow and shut in for them in
Bajuhemum and along the Danube, since the East-Goths increased so
powerfully, so they have spread out towards the north and west.
Agilolf, another of their dukes, related to Garibrand, set out, when
the latter started for Juvavum, through the Bojer forest against Regina
Castra, the strong Roman fortress on the Danube, where it reaches the
most northern point of its course. I wonder if he has yet taken it?"

"The news of victory cannot be delayed much longer; and with this
message comes also another, which closely concerns thee, Liuthari." The
young man blushed, and silently drooped his head. "Duke Agilolf's
daughter Adalagardis is the most beautiful young woman I have ever
seen," continued the old man eagerly. "Her father and King Liutbert
have long thought to unite you; but it seems that the proud Bajuvaren
will not ally himself by marriage with a king's house till he can do so
as an equal. Therefore he sent me home from my wooing journey with the
words: 'From the conquered Roman fortress I will send an answer.' And I
think it is time for thee, my boy! Thou standest in the fulness of thy
youth, and thou hast blood, not water, in thy veins."

"I often think fire burns therein," said the young man quietly, as if
ashamed.

"Dost thou think that I did not see, in the conquered Juvavum, with
what eyes thou didst gaze at every Roman maiden who looked at thee?
Many of them, I think, would not have struggled much in thy arms."

"What, Haduwalt! Force! Force towards a woman!"

"Eh! by Berahta and Holda! it would not need _much_ force. But these
black-haired, yellow-skinned, lean cats are nothing to my king's son;
they would ruin the whole race. But, Adalagardis! prosperity to thee
and to us if she becomes thy wife. I should imagine the shield-maidens
of Wotan to be like her! Hardly a finger's breadth shorter than thou,
fair hair floating around her to the ankles, like a king's golden
mantle, arms round, full and white as Alpine snow, joyful, sparkling
eyes, clear as the sky in spring, and a proudly-arched, heaving bosom.
By Fulla, the exuberantly strong and beautiful! that is the right
king's wife for the Alemanni! Why didst thou not go long ere this and
woo her?"

"Thou forgettest; I have never seen her. Her father said: 'I will
invite thee when I hold my court at Regina Castra.' Yet she may be the
happiness, uncertain and yet ardently longed for, the Sälde that I
seek. Stop! Here we are at our goal. This is the entrance.--But what is
this? This house seems inhospitable. The entrance is barricaded with
slabs of stone."

"Ha, now," laughed the old man. "I cannot blame them, the house-folk,
for shutting out such guests as Haduwalt and his thirst. But they are
not to be kept back so easily. Not Haduwalt, Hadumar's son--and still
less his thirst. Down with the stones!"

And he had already seized with a strong hand one of the piled-up marble
slabs, to throw them inwards.

"Stay!" cried Liuthari, "look!--on the topmost slab of the barricade
there is something written; perhaps the name of the house. I think I
can yet see to read it."

"I could not read it," laughed the other, "even if the sun stood high
at noon. What do the Runes say?"

And Liuthari read--slowly, laboriously, deciphering letter by letter:

"Hic--habitat--felicitas--nihil--mali intret."

Struck with surprise, motionless, the young man was silent for a while.
His heart beat--the blood rose throbbing in his temples.

"How strange!" said he then to himself. "Here dwells happiness--the
happiness that I am seeking? And the shooting star--did it on that
account guide here my steps?"

"Now, by the wondering Wotan," said Haduwalt, "have the Runes enchanted
thee?"

"Why, yes; this may indeed have been engraved to direct me to a
blessing, protecting enchantment."

The old man hastily seized the king's son by the shoulder and wished to
draw him away.

"Then let us retire," whispered he anxiously. "I would rather force my
way through two lines of Romans than through a magic spell. See,
already thou seemest spell-bound before the entrance. What is the
meaning of the Runes?"

"How can I explain it to thee? Now, something like this: 'The
wishing-god and Sälde herself live here. May malicious beings never
approach!' This Lady Sälde who lives here, I will see," said Liuthari
with decision; and, with the help of shield and knee, he pushed the
middle slabs inwards, so that the whole erection of stone fell with a
loud crash into the garden.

The young man stepped quickly across the threshold.

"This is no spell that scares away; it invites and entices in. Here
dwells happiness. The god of wishes himself has led me here. And _we
dare_ to approach--for we certainly are not malicious creatures."

"Who knows whether the master of the house may not think us so?" said
the old man thoughtfully, shouldering his spear, and following his
young friend, who impetuously, as if driven by a god, stepped towards
the inner door of the house, behind which--it was only closed by a dark
yellow curtain which fluttered in the wind--a faint glimmer of red
light seemed to beckon one in. Yet, in spite of all his haste, Liuthari
noticed a rose-bush, which, loosened from its support, lay helpless on
the sanded path. He carefully put it back in its place, remarking, "it
would be a pity if it were trodden down."




                             CHAPTER XVII.


Liuthari sprang up the four steps in one bound and pushed back the
curtain. But farther went he not: he stood as if spell-bound, as if
rooted to the ground at the sight which presented itself to him.

He indeed drew back a step as if alarmed; in his astonishment, his
spear struck the ground and threatened to escape from his right hand.
For towards the king's son, with a noble step, as an alabaster Hebe
might have stepped down from her marble pedestal, advanced Felicitas.

She carried her slumbering child tenderly on the left arm, pressing it
to her bosom; her wondrously beautiful face was yet paler in the
agitation of the moment; in the right hand she carried a flat silver
vessel, filled with red wine.

"I bid you welcome, O strangers, as our guests, at the hearth of my
husband. He is absent. I am quite alone in the house. Protect me and my
child."

Liuthari found no words; with wide-opened eyes and a beating heart he
looked at the beautiful woman before him.

But old Haduwalt, stepping to his side, saw with anxiety this look of
his young master. He spoke with great seriousness:

"Be of good cheer and rest assured, Roman matron. I swear to thee by
the renown of the honour of King Liutbert and of his son Liuthari, who
stands here and is strangely silent, I will protect thee as if thou
wert my own daughter, and he shall honour thee as if thou wert his
sister. Now drink, Liuthari, what is so hospitably offered thee," cried
he, turning and taking the spear from Liuthari's hand, who still stood
as if entranced.

The young man took the bowl, put it to his mouth, sipped the wine and
gave it back, without moving his eyes from her face.

"What is thy name?" asked he with a faint, trembling voice.

"Felicitas."

He quickly stepped forward.

"Happiness! Sälde! that is thy _name_: that _art_ thou."

"I do not understand thee."

"It is not necessary," muttered Haduwalt. "Give me also something to
drink."

He took the bowl from her and emptied it at a draught.

"Truly," continued he, "the wonderful wishing-god seems to live here;
how else couldst thou have come directly towards us, towards my thirst,
with a bowl of wine?"

"I saw you coming, startled by the crashing of the stone slabs;
Philemon, our old gray-headed slave, built them up. How could he
protect me, the lame, half-blind old man?"

"And didst thou imagine thyself protected by a heap of stones, without
defenders?"

"No, indeed! I know that I am protected by the good God in heaven, and
by my protecting angel. But, when I sent out the old man (the second
time) to look for my husband,--he did not wish to leave me alone, and I
was obliged repeatedly to bid him go:--he thought I should be in some
measure hidden if he blocked up the entrance."

Following the example of the hostess, Liuthari sat down. "Thy husband!"
said he, with knitted brows. "He has forsaken thee?--in this danger?"

"Oh, no," answered the young wife, "Yesterday evening, before, there
was any appearance of danger, he went into the town, since then he has
not returned, a few hours ago he was still living and active. Philemon
saw him in the street as he was going with spear and shield towards the
bridge across the Ivarus."

"Comfort thyself," interposed the old soldier cheerfully; "very few on
thy side fell in the battle down there."

"I know certainly that he is alive. If otherwise, do you think you
would see me so calm? The gracious God in heaven cannot allow that the
best, the most excellent man on this earth, should meet, with
undeserved suffering. I trust firmly in God and am comforted."

Haduwalt thought to himself: "I have already seen many an innocent
brave man fall;" but he reserved this wisdom of experience and
answered: "Certainly! he is at most taken prisoner. And, if so, be of
good cheer. The powerful son of our king here," continued he, with a
significant look at Liuthari, "will beg for this prisoner and release
him as a reward for thy hospitality."

Liuthari drew a deep breath.

"How long have you been married?"

"It is now eleven months."

"Eleven months--of perfect happiness!" said Liuthari slowly.

"Yes: of unspeakable happiness! Since thou understandest it--art thou
also married?"

"I! No! But I--I can imagine it."

Frankly and peacefully Felicitas returned the wondering look that
rested reverentially upon her. She felt that he marvelled at her
beauty; but it did not disturb her--his look was pure. The contrast
made her involuntarily think of the disquieting flame in the black
eyes of the Tribune, which had so often alarmed her. But she could
look with pleasure on this noble, serious countenance, into these
deeply-penetrating gray eyes.

She now rose slowly.

"I have always," said she, with a smile which made her look still more
charming, "been very much alarmed at--at--at you, whom we call
'Barbarians.' And how terrified I was at hearing the stones falling one
over the other! I anxiously looked out. But when I saw how carefully
you came up the narrow way, did not trample down the flowers, when even
he in the white mantle carefully raised a rose-bush that had fallen on
the gravel path, then I said to my little son on my arm: 'Fear not,
thou apple of mine eye, _they_ will do us no harm.' And I fearlessly
filled the wine-cup. And now that I have looked into your kind eyes,
now I feel myself perfectly safe just because you are both here. And I
know certainly you will bring me my husband to-morrow morning. I will
go and place the child there in our sleeping-room."

She pointed with the finger to a small doorway in the centre, before
which hung a red woollen curtain. "Then I will bring the provisions I
have in the house."

"Do not forget the wine," called out Haduwalt.

As she glided away like a softly rustling wave, Liuthari sprang up
impetuously.

"Stay, oh, stay!" cried he hastily, following her a step or two.

But Haduwalt held him firmly by the mantle.

"She did not hear it; thanks be to the gods."

Liuthari violently set himself free.

"She _must_ hear that I"----Then he calmed himself, and pressed his
right hand to his brow.

"Now--now--now--_now!_" said the old man slowly, with long pauses. "Has
young Liuthari now for the first time seen the thing called woman, who,
instead of a man's breastplate, carries a child at her breast? I truly
feared that the Runic spell had quite bewitched thee; for in the wine
there was no magic. _I_ feel nothing peculiar in _me_. The witchcraft
began as soon as thou didst see that white face. What? thou wilt follow
her? Halt there! How vexed I am that I have forgotten all the furious,
loud-sounding, bad names with which Hadumar, my father, scolded me when
he caught me as I was climbing into the neighbour's garden to steal the
sweet pears that the Romans had grafted on to the wild pears of the
Illara forest. He thrashed me soundly; but the caressing words have
escaped me--it is so long ago. 'Thou pilferer! thou pear-stealer! thou
sluggard! thou sneak!' These were some of the most tender. And now I
could use them all admirably. Why starest thou thus speechless,
senseless, after another man's wife? Is it such behaviour that the Lady
Lindgardis, thy glorious mother, has taught thee? Dost thou not
remember Adalagardis, thy bride?"

"Old giant! blustering, growling bear! that is enough of thine abuse; I
have had quite enough of it. Adalagardis my bride? She is but a name--a
wish of my father. Can I embrace, and clasp, and kiss a name? But this
woman is living flesh and blood. I felt the sweet warmth of her arm as
I touched it. Heat flashed through me. She is so beautiful--so
wonderfully, enchantingly beautiful! It is an elfin beauty. No, no;
words cannot express it. The goddesses of Walhalla are not so beautiful
as she. Where have I seen her equal?" continued he dreamily. "It was, I
think, under a warmer, fairer sky! Ah, yes; now I see it clearly. In
the service of the Emperor, I was sailing from Byzantium through the
blue Grecian seas. There, on an island covered with myrtle and laurel,
stood the white form of a Grecian goddess. I was affected then almost
as much as now by this woman." He was silent and laid his hand on his
beating heart.

"I have nothing to say against it, Liuthari, if thou admirest her as
thou wouldst a stone statue; even if thy taste does go so far astray.
Mine seeks something different. Commend me to Adala--yes, I will be
silent! But this small-waisted little one, straight as an arrow, and
not much taller, with her thin child's arms, she looks so fragile that
she would certainly be crushed the first time thou didst heartily touch
her."

"What can the bear know about touching the harp-strings?" said Liuthari
roughly.

"It may well be, O son of my king, that I do not understand much about
dolls made in white Grecian stone-work, for the amusement of boys. But
this I know, it is much more like the son of the lady Lindgardis, to
put other men's wives out of his burning thoughts. If thou hadst known
each other _before_, and thou now didst find her in the power of
another, and she still cared for thee secretly in her heart, then I
might say, Use the superior strength with which Wotan has gifted thee.
But thus----Here she comes again, innocent, unsuspecting, trustful! She
builds on _thy_ protection, the dear child. I cannot feel vexed with
her, because she is so harmless and innocent. I say to thee, if thou,
either by look or word, dost disturb her peace, I shall take care that
father and mother give thee a very bad reception when thou dost return
home after this expedition, and dost wish to sit at the honourable
hearth of the lady thy mother."

But Liuthari was now quite angry.

"Very much I shall fear thy chattering! And the lady Lindgardis's rod
does not any longer reach to _my_ back. What art thou chattering about
there, thou senseless being? As a conqueror I stand in this house; it
is all mine; all that I wish for; the house and the mistress. Her
husband is dead, or an imprisoned thrall; she herself widow, or my
servant as soon as I call her so."

"Thy thoughts are very nicely occupied with thy Grecian goddess! Wert
thou now _my_ boy, instead of my king's, very quickly, but not quietly,
wouldst thou flee from this house. But I will watch--I, Haduwalt, heir
of Hadamar--that a son of the king of the Alemanni does not trespass
like a honey-stealing boy."

The hostess then appeared, placed on the table a prettily-woven basket,
full of white, fragrant bread, then butter, fresh goat's cheese, and a
ham.

"Directly, directly!" answered she to the silent question of Haduwalt's
thirsty eyes, and appeared again immediately, bearing on her head an
immense amphora full of wine.

Demeanour and movements were full of grace: the left arm resting on her
hip, the right raised to the handle of the pitcher, perfectly upright,
advancing slowly because of the heavy burden, thus she stepped across
the threshold.

Liuthari sprang up hastily to take the burden from her. But Haduwalt
held his arm. "Let her alone, my son! _Alone_ she certainly will not
spill the wine; what might happen if thou didst help, I should not like
to see."

Liuthari drew a deep breath; he unbuckled the heavy armour and laid it
aside, as also the large Roman helmet from his burning head. He
mechanically took the food; but he ate very little, and did not take
his eyes from her beautiful face.

But soon Felicitas rose from the repast. "I am very tired," said she.
"Since Fulvius left I have not slept, I must now go to our child; if I
hear his gentle breathing I am quite composed. I will bring you pillows
and coverlets; you must be contented here; we have no other room worthy
of such guests."

"Never mind, as far as I am concerned," cried Liuthari, springing up.
"I cannot sleep; or I can sleep in the garden, on the soft turf, my
head resting on my shield. Come with me, old man."

"No, I should rather sleep _here_, exactly here," replied he, slily
smiling to himself. "But my wolf's skin is sufficient, friendly
hostess. Thou hast shut the back-door, which, as thou saidst, led from
the garden into thy sleeping-room?"

"Yes; Philemon will not return from the town before morning."

"Certainly not earlier. The gates will be shut at night-fall. I shall
lie here quite comfortably, seest thou, here on the threshold, before
the curtain which closes thy room. Sleep well and be quite at rest,"
cried he to her through the curtain, as she was putting away the
provisions. "Not even a little mouse could reach thee without waking
me. Seest thou, I fill the whole width of the entrance, thus! Now the
wine-pitcher near me. Hurrah! it is again quite full! And very
excellent the old wine tastes. Thy husband is a connoisseur therein. I
shall drink it all. I shall not sleep. Oh no!"

"Rest well, ye guests," said she, and disappeared.

Liuthari threw a peculiar, scornful look on the old soldier cowering in
the doorway, and on the immense pitcher of wine at his side. Then he
sprang laughing down the steps into the garden.

"What?" said he to himself, half-pleased and half-defiant, "the
growling bear thinks to keep me back if I am determined to step across
that threshold? _He_ keep guard! Before he has drunk half the heavy
wine he will snore like Thor in the hall of the giants. I might,
perhaps, have given it up; but now that he presumes to coerce me--well!
what I will do when I stand before the glorious sleeper--I know not
yet; but to her couch I will go, in spite of his upbraidings."

The ardent emotion of the youth relieved itself in his defiant anger
against his old friend, who looked after him with blinking eyes.

When the quick steps sounded in the far distance, he called gently:

"Young woman!"

"What wilt thou, then?"

"Hast thou not a ball of thread in the house?"

"Certainly; here is one."

"Very well. Give me the end through the curtain. So! Dost thou see? I
will fasten the thread here at my sword-belt. And thou--thou take the
ball in thy hand and hold it firmly during sleep. Dost thou understand?
And if thou shouldst have any bad dreams, pull quickly."

"Why so? I can call thee."

"You had better not trust to that," said the old man, rubbing his tired
eyes. "They say if I once get into a wine sleep, the battle-cry of all
the Alemanni would not wake me; but if pulled by the girdle I notice it
directly. Then I shall awake, if by chance I might have gone to sleep,
and will spring to thy help."

"As thou wilt, but it is unnecessary; thy companion keeps watch there
in the garden."

"Oh, do not believe that! he is as sleepy as a marmot, on him there is
no reliance, therefore, hold the ball fast, and now goodnight, sweet
creature. I am pleased with her myself," muttered he. "Very much she
pleases me. But I must speak against her to the boy. He has never yet
caressed the cheek of any woman but his mother, and he is overflowing
with passion and strength, like a noble young stag; and now he meets
this tender white doe! Shame! if her unsuspecting soul suffered even a
little fright. I must protect _her_--and _him_. One more draught, and
then: Haduwalt, fasting and watchful."

Dimly shone the little lamp in the sleeping-room, only a faint gleam
penetrated the red curtain.

In the front room the lamp went out.

Stillness reigned over the whole house, one heard only from the garden
the lulling murmur of the spring.

From the inner room the old man soon heard the deep, regular
respirations of the sleeping young wife. Haduwalt counted them. He
counted bravely up to a hundred. He then laid his hand, groping
uncertainly, on the thread at his girdle. "All right," thought he; "and
I shall not sleep. Certainly not! Hundred and one!"

Then he counted no more.




                             CHAPTER XVIII.


Over the silent garden lay the enchantment of a warm, glorious summer
night.

The innumerable stars shone magnificently in the cloudless heavens. And
now in the east, above the walls of Juvavum, which had till now hidden
her from view, rose the full moon, pouring forth a flood of glory,
showing in her fantastic light, so bright and yet so different from
day, the white house, the dark bushes, and the tall trees.

Numerous night-loving flowers in the gardens of the villas, and in the
meadows around, whose cups were closed by day, now opened and exhaled
their scent into the soft air.

The young German traversed the garden with agitated steps.

In the rose-bushes of the neighbouring gardens sang the nightingale, so
loud, so quavering, so ardent, so impassioned, Liuthari would rather
not have heard it; and yet he could not help listening to the fervid
tones.

The night wind played in his flowing locks, for, besides the
breast-plate, he had also left his helmet in the room, only taking with
him his spear, which served as a staff, and the round shield, on which
to lay his head, if he wished to rest.

But he found no rest.

With strong determination he went away from the house, which so
powerfully attracted him, towards the entrance where the stone slabs
lay about in confusion. As the store of stones had not been sufficient
to fill up the entrance, the old slave had with the pick-axe taken up
two slabs from the threshold, one of which bore the inscription. On
this heap of stones Liuthari now sat in a deep reverie, just within the
entrance, and looked at the stars and the soft light of the moon. He
forced himself to think of his parents at home, of the past day and its
victory, of the daughter of Agilolf with the fine-sounding name--what
might she be like?

All! it was of no use; he only deceived himself: through all the
pictures of his thoughts, pushing them aside, so that they melted away
as mist, appeared that noble, pale face, the rhythmic symmetry of that
figure.

"Felicitas!" breathed he lightly to himself.

Long, long sat he thus.

Suddenly the nightingale was silent.

Liuthari was quickly awakened out of his thoughts and dreams: in hot
haste, their iron hoofs resounding on the hard pavement of the road,
several horses came galloping from Juvavum; the practised ear of the
German clearly distinguished two, perhaps three horses.

The young man sprang up, and seized the spear which was lying near him.

"Those are not Alemannian horsemen," said he. "Who else can it
be?--Fugitive Romans? or even--her husband?"

He stepped behind the pier of the entrance to the right, where his form
and also his shadow was hidden, while the moonlight revealed clearly to
him the road and the footpath which led to the villa.

The hoof-strokes were now silent.

The watcher plainly saw how, at the turn o£ the footpath, three riders
sprang from their horses, and fastened them to a milestone.

The one, the tallest, wore a Roman helm, with a dark flowing plume, the
two others the close-fitting headgear of the Moorish cavalry; their
white mantles floated in the night wind.

"That is scarcely her husband, and those are not slaves of this villa.
And yet they are coming here. What may they be seeking? Shall I call
Haduwalt? Bah! King Liutbert's son has often already stood against
three enemies at once."

At this moment the one in the helmet reached the entrance.

"Wait here," he commanded, raising his short spear, "I alone will fetch
the woman; if I need you, I will call. But I think"----

"Halt! stand, Roman!" cried Liuthari, with levelled spear, springing
into the gateway in the full moonlight. "What seek you here?"

"A German! Down with him!" cried the three voices at once. But at the
same moment the leader stumbled two steps backwards, struck on the
breast by the spear of Liuthari.

If the armour-factory of Lorch had not supplied such excellent work,
the point would have gone through and through the man. But it rebounded
and--broke.

The German angrily dropped the now useless shaft.

"By Tartarus, that was a murderous blow!" cried Leo fiercely. "Prudence
is necessary. Raise the spears; we will throw together."

The three lances flew at once--all three the Alemannian stopped with
his shield. One, hurled with especial momentum and fury, penetrated the
threefold ox-hide and ash-wood of the shield, and wounded his arm near
the shoulder.

The young man, full of strength, hardly felt the slight wound; but the
shield, encumbered with three spear-shafts, he could no longer
dexterously use.

"Haduwalt!" cried he now with a loud voice, "Waffenâ! Feindô! Help!"

At the same time he seized one of the lances in his shield, tore it
out, and threw. The Moor at the right of the Tribune cried out and fell
dead to the ground.

"I will throw him down; thou, sir, stab him!" cried the other. It was
Himilco, the centurion.

"With the leap of the panther of his native deserts, he now sprang at
the throat of the German; but, quick as lightning, Liuthari had drawn
the short knife from his shoulder-belt. He thrust it into the brow
between the eyes of his assailant. The brown, muscular arms which had
seized the German's two shoulders as with the claws o£ a beast of prey,
loosened; without a sound the African fell backwards. But Liuthari had
not time to draw out the deeply imbedded dagger-blade.

"Haduwalt! Help!" cried he loudly.

For already the third enemy, a most formidable opponent, had rushed
upon him.

With a powerful sword-stroke he cleaved Liuthari's shield so that it
split into two halves, and, with the clinging spears, fell right and
left from his arm.

And the Roman had, at the same time, stuck the sharp iron spike in the
centre of his convex shield, deep into the naked right arm of the
king's son: the blood spurted out. He recoiled several steps from the
weight of the blow, nearly stumbling over the stone slabs.

The furious enemy, well armed both for defence and offence, now stepped
victoriously into the entrance, pushing aside with his foot the two
halves of the shield, that his adversary should not draw out the
spears.

With a keen look the Roman measured his adversary, who now drew his
last weapon, the short-handled battle-axe, from his girdle, and raised
it to strike. The towering stature of the young German must have seemed
fearful to the Roman, in spite of the superiority of his arms.

"Why should we tear each other to pieces, barbarian? Why dost thou
protect this house so grimly? I will not contest it with thee; I will
leave it to thee as soon as I have taken out one single thing."

"What thing? something belonging to thee? Thou art not the master of
the house."

"I will leave thee the house. I come only for--a woman."

"_Thy_ wife? Felicitas? No! she is not thine"

Furiously the other cried: "What? Thou art already so intimate in the
house! But neither is Felicitas _thy_ wife; and shall not become so.
Felicitas shall be _mine_!"

"Never!" cried Liuthari, and he sprang forward and dashed his stone
battle-axe against the magnificent bronze helmet, so that it split
asunder where the plume was attached, and fell in pieces from the head
of the wearer.

But alas! that head remained uninjured, while the axe, descending with
such force on the metal, broke off at the handle. For a moment the
Tribune stood as if stupefied by the blow. But he saw immediately how
his opponent, now quite defenceless, did not turn his face for flight,
but still stood before him.

With a wild, yelling, tiger-like shriek, in which thirst for blood and
joy of revenge sounded harshly together, he let his shield slip down,
raised the short, broad Roman sword for a blow, and with the cry,
"Felicitas is mine!" sprang on the German.

At that first outcry, Liuthari quickly bent forward, slightly raising
the heel of his left foot, and seized one of the marble slabs lying
before him; and now, first swinging it high above his head, with the
cry "Felicitas!" he hurled it with a good aim against the helmetless
forehead of the Tribune, as he sprang towards him.

Hoarsely groaning, clashing in his armour, the assailant fell
backwards; the sword escaped from his hand.

Already Liuthari knelt on his breast, seized the blade, and raised it
to force it into his throat.

But he breathed no more--he was dead. Liuthari rising, threw the sword
aside, and looked proudly on the three slain enemies.

"For Felicitas!" said he. "Now to her. I think--I have deserved it."

He knelt down by the running stream, washed the smarting, still
bleeding wound of his right arm, tore some broad strips from the linen
mantle of the dead centurion, bound them firmly around the wound, and
then trod with a light, elastic step the long path through the garden,
back to the house.




                              CHAPTER XIX.


Having reached it he pushed carefully aside the yellow curtain of the
outer door, letting the moonlight fall into the dark room.

At the entrance to the sleeping-room, before its red curtain, lay
Haduwalt, snoring; by him, lying on its side, empty, was the amphora.
Lightly, on tip-toe and with a beating heart, the young man advanced
and cautiously divided the two halves of the red curtain. He then
perceived, with a smile, the cunning arrangement of the thread; it was
still fastened to the leathern belt of the guard; but the hand of the
sleeper had opened; the ball lay on a stool by her couch. With a wide
stride Liuthari stepped across the old man into the sleeping-room.

Above the head of the bed, in a niche in the wall, stood the little
earthen lamp; it threw its mild light over the pillow. By its red
glimmer, he perceived the infant near the bed of the mother in a wicker
cradle.

The beautiful sleeper had loosened her abundant light-brown hair; it
flowed over her naked shoulders and splendidly curved, though delicate
bosom, from which the woollen covering had half slipped.

The dazzlingly white left arm she had placed behind her head and neck;
the right hand covered, as if protecting, the left breast. The intruder
stepped quite close. So ravishingly beautiful he had not seen her, when
awake; and the serious eyes now closed no longer maintained a strict
watch.

The full lips were half opened; he inhaled the sweet breath of her
mouth. The young man trembled from head to foot.

"Only one kiss," thought he, "and it shall not awake her."

He was already bending softly over her face. The beautiful lips then
moved, and in her sleep she said tenderly:

"Come, O my Fulvius; kiss me!"

With the speed of lightning, Liuthari turned, sprang lightly across
Haduwalt on the threshold, then down the steps into the garden, clasped
his two hands before his eyes, and murmured:

"Oh, what wickedness might I not have done!"

He fell on his knees, and hid his feverish head in the dewy grass.
Repentance, pain, unstilled longing, surged together within him, and
were at length dissolved in a salutary stream of tears. Long lay he
thus. At last the youth of the exhausted, wounded man asserted itself
beneficially; he sank into a deep, dreamless sleep.




                              CHAPTER XX.


When the next morning the summer sun rose magnificently over Juvavum,
and the golden oriole began its flute-like song, young Liuthari sprang
up, a healed and a wiser man.

The wound in his arm no longer pained, and his imagination, which had
been much more excited than his heart, was stilled.

No longer dissatisfied with himself, joyful and composed, he first
cooled his face in the spring, and then, carefully hiding the wounded
arm under his mantle, he walked up the steps into the outer room.
Haduwalt, yawning and stretching up both his arms, received him with
the words:

"But thou hast long slept. And I--I think I have not closed my eyes the
whole night."

"But perhaps the ears!" laughed Liuthari. "Where is the mistress? I am
hungry."

"Here am I," cried Felicitas. "I will bring you directly fresh-laid
eggs, and milk, and honey. Philemon is now milking the cow in the
meadow behind the house."

"Only think," said she, now stepping from behind the curtain and
offering a hand to each guest: "very early, as soon as the gates were
again opened, the old slave came back from the town by the meadow-path,
and awoke me knocking at the outer door. I had slept so firmly."

"And very sweetly dreamt?" said Liuthari, smiling.

"Yes--as always, _if_ I dream: of Fulvius. Certainly Philemon has not
found his master; but still I am of good cheer. The good Johannes had
caused the dead and the wounded to be brought together--the former in
front of, and the latter into the church. Philemon carefully inspected
them. Thanks to the God of heaven, the saints and the good Genii, my
Fulvius is not among them." And she sat down with her guests.

Philemon brought an immense jug fall of foaming warm milk. He threw a
wondering look on the two Germans, whom his mistress had represented to
him as protectors, not enemies, and he went again to the back of the
house. Felicitas followed him to fetch the child, which seemed to be
waking.

"Tell me now, grim teacher and armour-master," began Liuthari, "wilt
thou in thine old age learn woman's handiwork, and the art of using
thread? What hast thou there trailing at thy girdle?"

Quite taken aback the old giant looked down at his portly person, and
at the long, long thread which was entangled about his clumsy feet.

"That? Oh, that is only something between the mistress and myself. She
has become so fond of me--much more so than of thee--and that I should
not escape her, she bound me fast to her couch."

"Thou wouldest complain of me to my mother----!"

"Yes; if I had not kept watch, who knows----!"

"Now I will accuse _thee_ to thy wife, the strict Grimmtrud, that thou
didst bind thyself to the couch of a young beauty."

The young man stooped down, picked up the ball, and put it in his vest.

"I shall keep the thread," continued he gravely, "as a remembrance of
the hour when Haduwalt slept, the thread lay loose on the ground, but
Liuthari watched--for three."

Felicitas after a while again came in, the child on her arm.

"The day advances," sighed she, "and I begin to be very anxious. My
Fulvius, where mayest thou be?"

"Here I am," cried a joyous, clear voice, and the longed-for husband
rushed in through the open doorway.

With a cry of happiness Felicitas sprang up. He folded mother and child
tenderly in his arms.

Liuthari rose. He looked at them without pain, and regarded the husband
with a frank, happy look, who, however, astonished, drew back a step,
and measured the handsome young man with his eyes. Hot fear flashed
through him in an instant; but the alarm disappeared, fleeing like a
cloud-shadow, when he looked into His wife's face, so peaceful, so
radiantly happy.

"What has happened to me, my darling? The day before yesterday shut up
in the debtor's tower, early yesterday set free by Severus, taken by
him to the battle--we were defeated--I fled, was pursued, fell into the
river, was carried away by the stream--half stupefied I at last reached
the bank--was taken prisoner by other horsemen, led into the town, and
this morning--saved by a miracle of the Lord or the holy Saint Peter, I
know not which."

"A miracle! Oh, thank the mercy of the God of heaven! He heard my
prayer! But what miracle?"

"Johannes, who never wearies in the care of his people, had already
yesterday evening besought the barbarian Duke to release all the
citizens of Juvavum who were prisoners of war. The powerful prince
answered that he would willingly set free all that fell to his share of
the booty, but those that fell to his warriors he had not the power to
release, only to redeem--quite a different law prevails with the
Germans than with us--and he could not exhaust his treasure to do that.
So last night many of us were set at liberty, but the larger
proportion, and amongst them myself, remained in bondage. Then in the
early morning Johannes appeared again in the Capitol, where the Duke
had fixed his abode, and--redeemed us all! Thou art astonished. Thou
mayest well ask whence the man, who possesses nothing but his robe and
staff, procured so much money! Yes, that is the miracle! When, sad at
the fate of the prisoners, he returned to his Basilica, he found, in an
old vault under the church-floor, a bag full of gold pieces, and also a
little purse of precious stones, abundantly sufficient to ransom us
all. But whence came this treasure? Nobody knows. The angel of the Lord
manifestly heard the prayer of Johannes, and brought the treasure. The
whole of Juvavum is amazed at the miracle. And I vow to thee, thou
godly one, I will henceforth listen more devoutly to the words of
Johannes. But thee, my beloved! what alarm has threatened thee!"

"But has not reached me, thanks be to God, and also to our guests; and
perhaps," added she smiling, "to the inscription on the entrance-slab,
that kept back misfortune."

"Dost thou know _who_ wished to step across it?"

"How should I? I have not left the house."

"Then thou hast no idea how truly thou didst speak! Listen and breathe
again. As I just now was hastening here from the town, on approaching
the hill, I saw fastened to the milestone three horses, and among
them--I know him too well--the black steed of the Tribune! Full of
alarm, I sprang to our gate; there lay--oh, horrible!--two slain Moors,
and, directly across the threshold, stretched on his back, the terrible
Tribune, with a shattered skull! His face was half covered with the
inscription-slab, and the corner-piece, broken off, was deeply embedded
in his skull. _This_ stone has felled him who was never conquered. But
what arm hurled it?"

The old Haduwalt, who at the first mention of conflict had
instinctively looked into the averted face of his young master, now
drew the white mantle from his shoulder, showed the bloody bandage, and
said: "This arm--And I!--Oh, Liuthari, my darling!--I meanwhile lay and
slept!"

"Tolerably firmly," said the young man smiling, and continued, turning
to the master of the house: "Yes, I slew him, that very bold man; he
wished to force his way in, and"----

"Steal Felicitas!" cried the husband, pressing his wife, now terribly
alarmed, to his breast. "Oh, sir, how can we thank thee?" he exclaimed.

But Felicitas could not utter a word; she could only direct her eyes,
swimming in tears, towards her preserver. She had not appeared so
beautiful even in the night.

"Thanks!" laughed Liuthari, "I fought for my life. But listen! who
comes here?"

The steps of armed men were heard in the garden, and there entered,
accompanied by five followers, Garibrand the Duke.

"A good piece of work have you two done out there before the entrance.
The Tribune, whom we have sought everywhere, he fell certainly by thy
hand. I have found thee at last, young hero! Welcome news I bring thee.
A messenger from thy father is seeking thee. The Roman fortress on the
Regan stream has fallen. My cousin, Duke Agilolf, and thy father, have
settled the betrothal: Agilolf invites thee to his halls. Adalagardis,
the most beautiful princely daughter of the Germans, is awaiting thee."

"Hail to thee, thou son of my king! this is thy reward for this night,"
cried Haduwalt.

"Betrothal! I have never seen her!" cried Liuthari, hesitating.

"Betrothal! yes, if you please each other," said the Duke.

"_He_ will certainly please _her_." said Haduwalt, clapping the
blushing youth on the shoulder; "and I hope," whispered he quietly in
his ear, "that _she_, the beauty whom thou _mayest_ love, will right
well please _thee_."

"Choose now," continued the Duke, "what thou wilt of the booty. To you
Alemanni, to thee above all, do we owe the victory."

"I will follow thee," said Liuthari, rising hastily. "Help me, old
friend!"

The armour-master helped him to buckle on his breastplate; the young
man raised the beautifully-shaped Roman helmet with the towering
heron's plume to his head. Magnificent stood the king's son, his joyful
countenance radiant with the noblest sentiments.

"Oh, now all is well," rejoiced Fulvius. "The Tribune is slain; Zeno
the usurer is dead, murdered by an unknown hand, without doubt by his
slaves, so Johannes tells me. There is no longer an Emperor in Ravenna;
we were assured of this yesterday morning by this young hero. Now am I
free from all debts to the Fiscus."

"And no less do I assure thee," laughed Liuthari, "that this powerful
Duke here has stepped into the Emperor's place--_his_ debtor art thou
now."

Fulvius anxiously put his hand to his right ear, and looked dismayed at
the mighty man.

"Fear not," continued Liuthari. "I ask, Duke Garibrand, as a part of my
share of the booty, this villa and the land belonging to it. And free
from all debt."

"It shall be as thou hast said," answered the Bajuvaren.

"And to you both, Fulvius and Felicitas, I give this free property,
before these seven free men as witnesses. Their oath will be of service
to you if anyone should contest your right and warrant."

"Thanks, sir; thanks."

"Thou art, then, Fulvius the stone-mason?" interposed the Duke. "The
priest Johannes commended thee to me as faithful and brave; if thou
dost prove thyself so, I will place thee as steward over my lands
outside this gate."

Felicitas, after a short whispering with her husband, now stepped
towards Liuthari, with the child on her arm. She blushed faintly, and
said:

"Sir, he who gives so much as thou--must give still more. Our little
son has not yet a name. Next Sunday I shall take him to Johannes, to
the font. How shall the boy be named?"

"Felix Fulvius," said the king's son, deeply moved, laying his hand
on the tiny head, "and--_Liuthari_, in order that my name may yet
strike many times on your ear. But he who gives a name, gives also a
present--that is German custom. Here, young housewife, take this ring.
I stripped it from the finger of a patrician some years ago, whom I
slew in battle. In Augusta Vindelicorum the dealers say it is worth as
much as half their town. That is a bit of treasure in case of need. And
now, both of you, farewell!"

"Stop!" here cried Haduwalt; "we do not thus bid farewell--farewell for
life! Thou didst ask, stone-mason, how thou couldst thank the hero. Let
thy young wife give him one kiss; believe me, he has deserved it--he is
a gallant youth!"

Fulvius led his blushing wife towards him.

Liuthari pressed a kiss on the white brow, and cried: "Farewell, thou
lovely one, for ever!"

And already he was gone: the curtain rustled behind him. The other
Germans followed; at the garden entrance they mounted their horses and
galloped quickly back towards the Porta Vindelica.

The first thing that Fulvius did, after he had with Philemon removed
the dead bodies, was carefully to reset the stone with the inscription,
into the pavement of the entrance; the broken-off corner he left unset.

"It shall," said he, "for ever be to us a proof how effectual the adage
has been."

And the adage, it proved itself true to the wedded pair through their
whole life.

No misfortune crossed that threshold while they dwelt there. Blooming
sons and daughters grew up after Felix Fulvius Liuthari. Sickness never
befell them, parents or children, although the pestilence might be
raging in Juvavum and in the villas round about.

The Ivarus often overflowed, spreading its waves and destruction over
men, animals, horses, and grain. Before this gate, before the Mercurius
Hill, it each time stopped.

A landslip overwhelmed the neighbours' gardens right and left. An
immense piece of rock rebounded from the inscription stone, and was
shattered into a thousand fragments. Fulvius became "Villicus" of all
the ducal property in Juvavum, and stood, on account of his prudence
and fidelity, high in the favour of Duke Garibrand.

When he and Felicitas had become quite old people, fully eighty years
of age, but active and vigorous, they were sitting one June evening
hand in hand in the garden. They had had a seat made just within the
entrance, so that their feet rested on the adage-stone.

Thus they sat, and thought of past times. Sweetly sang the golden
oriole in the neighbouring beech forest. But it gradually became
silent, for the air had become very sultry; a storm was approaching.

There was a vivid flash of lightning, and a tremendous peal of thunder.
The children hastened to bring their old parents into the house.

But when Felix Fulvius Liuthari, hurrying in advance of the others,
reached them, he found them both dead.

A flash of lightning had killed them both.

They still held each other hand in hand, and smiled, as if to say:
"Death, which comes thus, is no misfortune, but a blessing."




                                THE END.




            CHARLES DICKENS AND EVANS, CRYSTAL PALACE PRESS.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Felicitas, by Felix Dahn

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FELICITAS ***

***** This file should be named 32222-8.txt or 32222-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/2/2/32222/

Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by Google Books

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
</doc>
<doc id="file28566135" filename="pg32330.txt" parent_folder="History" url="https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/32330/pg32330.txt">
Project Gutenberg's A Struggle for Rome, Vol. 2 (of 3), by Felix Dahn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Struggle for Rome, Vol. 2 (of 3)

Author: Felix Dahn

Translator: Lily Wolffsohn

Release Date: May 11, 2010 [EBook #32330]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A STRUGGLE FOR ROME, VOL. 2 (OF 3) ***




Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the Web Archive





Transcriber's Notes:
1. Page scan source:
      http://www.archive.org/details/astruggleforrom01dahngoog
2. The diphthong OE and oe are represented by [OE] and [oe].
3. [=e] represents an "e" with a macron above.
4. Footnote is at the end of the book.





                          A STRUGGLE FOR ROME.

                                   BY
                              FELIX DAHN.


           _T R A N S L A T E D  F R O M  T H E  G E R M A N_
                                   BY
                            LILY WOLFFSOHN.


           "If there be anything more powerful than Fate,
            It is the courage which bears it undismayed."
                                                GEIBEL.


                           IN THREE VOLUMES.
                                VOL. II.



                                LONDON:
                        RICHARD BENTLEY AND SON.
                                  1878.
                        [_All Rights Reserved._]






                          A STRUGGLE FOR ROME.

                        BOOK III.--_Continued._

                               THEODAHAD.




                               CHAPTER X.


On the evening of the third day after the arrival of the Gothic escort
sent by Totila, Valerius had terminated his arrangements and fixed the
next morning for his departure from the villa.

He was sitting with Valeria and Julius at the evening meal, and
speaking of the prospect of preserving peace, which was no doubt
undervalued by the young hero, Totila, who was filled with the ardour
of war. The old Roman could not endure the thought of seeing armed
Greeks enter his beloved country.

"I, too, wish for peace," said Valeria reflectively, "and yet----"

"Well?" asked Valerius.

"I am certain," continued the girl, "that if war broke out you would
then learn to love Totila as he deserves. He would defend me and
Italy----

"Yes," said Julius, "he has an heroic nature, and something still
greater than that----"

"I know of nothing greater!" cried Valerius.

At that moment clattering footsteps were heard in the atrium, and
young Thorismuth, the leader of the Gothic escort, and Totila's
shield-bearer, entered abruptly.

"Valerius," he said, "let the carriages be harnessed, the litters
brought out; you must go at once."

They all started from their seats.

"What has happened? Have they landed?"

"Speak," said Julius, "what do you fear?"

"Nothing for myself," answered the Goth, smiling.

"I did not wish to startle you sooner than was necessary. But now I
dare no longer be silent. Yesterday early, the waves washed a corpse
ashore----"

"A corpse!"


"A Goth, one of our sailors; it was Alb, the steersman of Totila's
ship."

Valeria grew pale, but did not tremble.

"It may be an accident--the man was drowned."

"No," said the Goth, "he was not drowned; hi» breast was pierced by an
arrow."

"That means a naval combat, nothing more," said Valerius.

"But to-day----"

"To-day?" cried Julius.

"To-day none of the country people who usually pass on their way from
Regium to Colum, made their appearance, and a trooper, whom I sent to
Regium for news, has never returned.

"That still proves nothing," said Valerius obstinately. His heart
rebelled against the thought of a landing of his hated enemies. "The
waves have often before rendered the way impassable."

"But just now I have been some distance on the road to Regium, and when
I laid my ear to the ground, I felt it tremble under the tramp of many
horses approaching in mad haste. You must fly!"

Valerius and Julius now took down their weapons, which hung upon the
pillars of the room. Valeria sighed deeply, and pressed her hand to her
heart.

"What is to be done?" she asked.

"Man the Pass of Jugum," cried Valerius, "through which the coast-road
runs. It is very narrow, and can be held for some time."

"Eight of my men are already there; I will join them as soon as you are
mounted. The other half of my troop shall escort you on your journey.
Haste!"

But ere they could leave the room, a Gothic soldier, covered with blood
and mire, rushed in.

"Fly!" he cried, "they are there!"

"Who is there, Gelaris!" asked Thorismuth.

"The Greeks! Belisarius! the devil!"

"Speak," ordered Thorismuth.

"I got to the pine-wood before Regium without seeing anything
suspicious, but also without meeting with a soul upon the way. As,
looking eagerly forward, I rode past a thick tree, I felt a pull at my
neck as if my head would be torn from my shoulders, and the next minute
I lay on the road under my horse."

"Badly sat, Gelaris," scolded Thorismuth.

"Oh yes, of course! A noose of horse-hair round his neck, and an arrow
whistling past his head, and a better rider would fall than Gelaris,
son of Genzo! Two demons--wood-devils or goblins they seemed to
me--rushed out of the bushes and over the ditch, tied me upon my horse,
took me between their little shaggy ponies, and ho!----"

"Those are Belisarius's Huns!" cried Valerius.

"Away they went with me. When I came to myself again, I was in Regium
in the midst of the enemy, and there I learned everything. The
Queen-regent is murdered, war is declared, the enemy has taken Sicily
by surprise, the whole island has gone over to the Emperor----"

"And the fortress, Panormus?"

"Was taken by the fleet, which made its way into the harbour. The
mast-heads were higher than the walls of the town. From thence they
shot their arrows, and jumped on to the walls."

"And Syracusæ?" asked Valerius.

"Fell through the treachery of the Sicilians; the Gothic garrison is
murdered. Belisarius rode into Syracusæ amidst a shower of flowers,
and--for it was the last days of his consulate--threw gold coins about
him, amidst the applause of the population."

"And where is the commodore: where is Totila?"

"Two of his ships were sent to the bottom by the pointed prows of the
triremes; his own and one other. He sprang into the sea in full
armour--and is--not yet--fished up again."

Valeria sank speechless upon a couch.

"The Greek general," continued the messenger, "landed yesterday, in the
dark and stormy night, near Regium. The town received him with
acclamation. He will only halt until he has re-ordered his army, and
will then march at once to Neapolis. His vanguard--the yellow-skinned
troopers who caught me--were to advance at once and take the Pass of
Jugum. I was to be their guide. But I led them far away--to the
west--into the sea-swamps--and escaped--in the darkness of evening.
But--they shot--arrows after me--and one hit--I can speak--no more----"
and he fell clattering to the ground.

"He is a dead man," cried Valerius, "they carry poisoned arrows! Up!
Julius and Thorismuth! take my child to Neapolis. I myself will go to
the pass, and cover your retreat."

In vain were Valeria's prayers; the face and mien of the old man
assumed an expression of iron resolve.

"Obey!" he cried, "I am the master of this place, and the son of this
soil, and I will ask the Huns of Belisarius what they have to do in my
fatherland! No, Julius! I must know that you are with Valeria.
Farewell!"

While Valeria and Julius, with their Gothic escort and most of
the slaves, fled at full speed on the road to Neapolis, Valerius
hurried, at the head of half-a-dozen slaves, out of the garden of the
villa, towards the pass, which--not far from the beginning of his
estates--formed an arch over the road to Regium. The rock on the left
hand, to the north, was inaccessible, and on the right, to the south,
it fell abruptly into the sea, whose waves often overflowed the road.
But the mouth of the pass was so narrow, that two men, standing side by
side with their shields, could close it like a door. Thus Valerius
might hope to keep the pass, even against a much superior force, long
enough to afford the swift horses of the fugitives a sufficient start.

As the old man was hastening through the moonless night along the
narrow path which led between the sea and his vineyards to the pass, he
remarked to the right hand, on the sea, at a considerable distance from
the land, the bright beam of a little light, which unmistakably shone
from the mast-head of some vessel. Valerius started. Were the
Byzantines pushing forward to Neapolis by sea? Were they about to land
soldiers at his back? But if so, would not more lights be visible?

He turned to question the slaves, who, at his order, but with visible
reluctance, had followed him from the villa. In vain; they had
disappeared into the darkness of the night. They had deserted their
master as soon as they were unobserved.

So Valerius arrived alone at the pass, the nether or western end of
which was guarded by two Goths, while two more filled the eastern
entrance towards the enemy, and the other four kept the inner space.

Scarcely had Valerius joined the two in front, when suddenly the tramp
of horses was heard close at hand, and soon, round the next turning of
the road, there appeared two horsemen, advancing at full trot.

Each carried a torch in his right hand; and these torches alone threw
light upon the midnight scene, for the Goths avoided everything that
could betray their small number.

"By Belisarius's beard!" cried the foremost rider, checking his horse
to a walk, "this hen-ladder is here so narrow, that an honest horse has
scarcely room in it; and there is a hollow way or---- Halt! What moves
there?"

He stopped his horse, and bent carefully forward, holding the torch far
out before him. In this position, close before the entrance of the
pass, he presented an easy aim.

"Who is there!" he again asked.

For all reply a Gothic spear pierced through the mail of his
breast-plate and into his heart.

"Enemies!" screamed the dying man, and fell backwards from his saddle.

"Enemies! enemies!" cried the man behind him, and, hurling his
treacherous torch far from him, turned his animal and galloped back;
while the horse of the fallen man remained quietly standing at his
master's side.

Nothing was heard in the stillness of the night but the tramp of the
fleeing charger, and the gentle splash of the waves at the foot of the
rocks.

The hearts of the men in the pass beat with expectation.

"Now be cool, men," said Valerius; "let none be tempted out of the
pass. You in the first row will press your shields firmly together; we
in the middle will throw; you three in the rear will hand us the
spears, and be attentive to all that takes place."

"Sir! sir!" cried the Goth who stood in the road behind the pass, "the
light! the ship approaches ever nearer!"

"Be wary, and challenge it, if----"

But the enemy was already at hand. It was a troop of fifty mounted
Huns, carrying a few torches. As they turned round the corner of the
road, the scene was illuminated with patches of glaring light,
contrasted with deep gloom.

"It was here, sir!"  said the horseman who had escaped. "Be cautious."

"Take back the dead man and the horse," commanded a rough voice, and
the leader, lifting his torch, rode slowly towards the entrance of the
pass.

"Halt!"  cried Valerius in Latin; "who are you, and what do you want?"

"_I_ have to ask that!" returned the leader of the horsemen in the same
language.

"I am a Roman citizen, and defend my fatherland against all invaders!"
cried Valerius.

Meanwhile the leader had examined the scene by the light of his torch.
His practised eye recognised the impossibility of avoiding the pass,
either to the right or to the left; and, at the same time, the extreme
straitness of its entrance.

"Then, friend," he said, retreating a little, "we are allies. We are
Romans too, and will free Italy from its oppressors. Therefore give way
and let us through."

Valerius, who wished to gain time by all possible means, spoke again.

"Who are you, and who sent you?"

"My name is Johannes. The enemies of Justinian call me 'the bloody,'
and I lead Belisarius's light horse. The whole country, from Regium
till here, has received us with rejoicing; this is the first hindrance.
We should have got much farther long ago had not a dog of a Goth led us
into the vilest swamp that ever swallowed up a good horse. Valuable
time was lost. So do not hinder us! Life and property will be spared to
you, and you will receive a rich reward into the bargain, if you will,
guide us. Speed is victory! The enemy is bewildered; they must not have
time to recover themselves before we stand before Neapolis, yea, even
before Rome. 'Johannes,' said Belisarius to me, 'as I cannot order the
storm-wind to sweep the land before me, I order _you_ to do it!' So get
away and let us through!"

And he spurred his horse.

"Tell Belisarius--so long as Cnejus Valerius lives, he shall not
advance one step in Italy! Back, you robbers!"

"Madman! would you stand by the Goths and oppose us?"

"By hell, if against you!"

The leader again cast searching glances to the right and left.

"Listen," he said; "you can really stop us here for a time. But not for
long. If you yield, you shall live. If not, I will first have you
skinned alive, and then impaled!"

He lifted his torch, looking for a weak point.

"Back!" cried Valerius; "shoot, friend!"

"The twang of a bow-string was heard, and an arrow struck the helm of
the horseman.

"The devil!" he exclaimed, and spurred his horse back.

"Dismount!" he ordered, "every man of you!"

But the Huns did not like to part with their horses.

"What, sir? Dismount?" asked one of the nearest.

Johannes struck him in the face. The man did not move.

"Dismount!" thundered Johannes again. "Would you go into that
mouse-hole on horseback!" and he flung himself out of the saddle. "Six
climb the trees and shoot from above. Six lie down and creep forward on
each side of this road, shooting as they lie. Ten shoot standing;
breast high. Ten guard the horses. You others follow me with the spear
as soon as the strings twang. Forwards!"

He handed his torch to one of the men and took a lance.

While the Huns were carrying out his orders, Johannes again examined
the pass as well as he could.

"Yield!" he cried.

"Come on!" shouted the Goths.

Johannes gave a sign and twenty arrows whistled at once.

A cry, and the foremost Goth on the right fell. He had been struck in
the forehead by one of the men on the trees. Valerius, under shelter of
his shield, sprang into his place. He came just at the right moment to
repulse the furious attack of Johannes, who ran at the gap with his
lance in rest. Valerius received the thrust on his shield, and struck
at the Byzantine, who stumbled and fell, close to the entrance. The
Huns behind him fell back.

The Goth who stood at Valerius's side could not resist the temptation
to render the leader harmless. He sprang a step forward out of the pass
with up-lifted spear. But this was just what Johannes wanted. Up he
started with lightning swiftness, thrust the surprised Goth over the
low wall of the road on the right of the pass, and the next moment he
stood on the exposed side of Valerius--who was defending himself
against the renewed attack of the Huns--and stabbed him with all his
might in the groin with his long Persian knife.

Valerius fell; but the three Goths who stood behind him succeeded in
pushing Johannes--who had already pressed forward into the middle of
the pass--back and out with the beaks of their shields.

Johannes retired to his men, in order to command a new salvo of arrows.
Two of the Goths silently placed themselves in the entrance of the
pass; the third held the bleeding Valerius in his arms.

Just then the guard at the rear of the pass rushed in: "The ship, sir!
the ship! They have landed! they take us in the rear! Fly! we will
carry you--a hiding-place in the rocks----"

"No," said Valerius, raising himself, "I will die here; rest my sword
against the wall and----"

But a loud flourish of Gothic horns was heard in the rear. Torches
shone, and a troop of thirty Goths hurried into the pass, Totila at
their head. His first glance fell upon Valerius.

"Too late! too late!" he cried in deep grief. "Revenge! Follow me!
Forwards!" And he rushed furiously through the pass, followed by his
spear-bearing foot-soldiers.

Fearful was the shock of meeting upon the narrow road between sea and
rocks. The torches were extinguished in the skirmish; and the dawning
day gave but a faint grey light.

The Huns, although superior in numbers to their bold adversaries, were
completely taken by surprise. They thought that a whole army of Goths
was on the march. They hastened to join their horses and fly. But the
Goths reached the place where the animals stood at the same moment as
their owners, and, in confused heaps, men and horses were driven off
the road into the sea. In vain Johannes himself struck at his flying
people; their rush threw him to the ground; he sprang up immediately
and attacked the nearest Goth. But he had fallen into bad hands. It was
Totila; he recognised him.

"Cursed Flax-head!" he cried, "so you are not drowned?"

"No, as you see!" cried Totila, and struck a blow at the other's helm,
which cleft it through and entered slightly into his skull, so that he
staggered and fell.

With this all resistance was at an end. The nearest of the horsemen
just managed to lift Johannes into a saddle, and galloped off with him.

The scene of action was deserted.

Totila hurried back to the pass. He found Valerius, pale, with closed
eyes, his head resting on his shield. He threw himself on his knees
beside him, and pressed his stiffening hand to his heart.

"Valerius!" he cried, "father! do not, do not leave me so. Speak to me
once more!"

The dying man faintly opened his eyes.

"Where are they?" he asked.

"Beaten and fled!"

"Ah! victory!" cried Valerius, breathing anew. "I die happy! And
Valeria--my child--is she saved?"

"She is. Escaped from the naval combat, and from the sea itself, I
hastened to warn Neapolis and save you. I had landed near the high-road
between your house and Neapolis; there I met Valeria and learned your
danger. One of my boats received her and her companions on board to
take them to Neapolis; with the other I came here to save you--oh! only
to revenge you!" and he laid his head upon the breast of the dying man.

"Do not weep for me; I die victorious! And to you, my son, I owe it."

He stroked the long fair locks of the sorrowing youth.

"And Valeria's safety too! Oh! to you also, I hope, I shall owe the
salvation of Italy. You are hero enough to save this country--in spite
of Belisarius and Narses! You can--and you will--and your reward is the
hand of my beloved child."

"Valerius! my father!"

"She is yours! But swear to me"--and Valerius raised himself with an
effort and looked into Totila's eyes--"swear to me by the genius of
Valeria that she shall not become your wife until Italy is free, and
not a sod of her sacred soil is pressed by the foot of a Byzantine."

"I swear it," cried Totila, enthusiastically pressing Valerius's hand,
"by the genius of Valeria I swear it!"

"Thanks, thanks, my son. Now I can die in peace--greet Valeria--in your
hand is her fate--and that of Italia!"

He laid his head back upon his shield, crossed his arms over his
breast, and expired.

Totila silently laid his hand upon the dead man's heart, and remained
in this position for some time.

A dazzling light suddenly roused him from his sad reverie; it was the
sun, whose golden disk rose gloriously over the summit of the rocks.

Totila stood up, and looked at the rising luminary. The sea glittered
in the bright rays, and a golden light spread over the land.

"By the genius of Valeria!" repeated Totila in a low voice, and
stretched out his hand towards the glorious sun.

Like the dead man he felt strengthened and comforted by his weighty
oath; the sense of having a noble duty to perform elevated his
feelings. He turned back, and ordered that the corpse should be carried
to his ship, that it might be taken and deposited in the tomb of the
Valerians at Neapolis.



                              CHAPTER XI.

During these portentous events the Goths had been by no means idle. But
all measures of vigorous defence were paralysed, and, indeed,
intentionally frustrated, by the cowardly treachery of the King.

Theodahad had soon recovered from his consternation at the declaration
of war on the part of Petros, for he could not and would not part with
the conviction that it had only been made in order to keep up
appearances and save the honour of the imperial government.

He had not again spoken with Petros in private, and the latter must
necessarily have some plausible reason for the appearance of Belisarius
in Italy. No doubt the act of Petros had been a long-determined means
for the accomplishment of the secret plans of the Emperor.

The thought of carrying on a war--of all thoughts the most unbearable
to Theodahad--he very well understood how to keep at a distance, for he
wisely reflected that it takes two to fight.

"If I do not defend myself," he thought, "the attack will soon be over.
Belisarius may come--I will do all in my power to prevent any
resistance being made, for that would only embitter the Emperor against
me. If, on the contrary, the general reports to Byzantium that I have
furthered his success in all possible ways, Justinian will not refuse
to fulfil the old contract, if not wholly, at least in part."

In this sense he acted. He called all the active land and sea forces of
the Goths away from South Italy, where he expected the landing of
Belisarius, and sent them eastwards to Liburnia, Dalmatia, Istria, and
westwards to South Gaul, pretending--supported by the fact that
Belisarius had sent a small detachment of troops to Dalmatia against
Salona, and had exchanged ambassadors with the Frankish King--that the
principal attack of the Byzantines was to be expected by land from
Istria, aided by the allied Franks on the Rhodanus and Padus. The
feigned movements of Belisarius gave colour to this pretext, so that
what is almost incredible took place. The troops of the Goths, their
ships, weapons, and war munition, in great quantities, were led away in
all haste just before the invasion; South Italy, as far as Rome, and
even to Ravenna, was exposed; and all measures of defence were
neglected in the very parts where the first blow was to fall.

The Dravus, Rhodanus, and Padus were crowded with Gothic sails and
arms, while towards Sicily, as we have seen, even the most necessary
guard-ships were wanting.

And the turbulent urgency of the Gothic patriots did not do much good.

The King had got rid of Witichis and Hildebad, by sending them with
troops to Istria and Gaul; and old Hildebrand, who would not quite give
up his belief in the last of the Amelungs, opposed a tough resistance
to the suspicions of Teja.

But the courage of Theodahad was most strengthened by the return of his
Queen.

Shortly after the declaration of war, Witichis had marched with a
Gothic troop before the Castle of Feretri, where Gothelindis had taken
refuge with her Pannonian mercenaries, and had persuaded her to return
voluntarily to Ravenna, assuring her of safety, until her cause should
be formally examined into and decided before the approaching National
Assembly of the people and the army near Rome.

These conditions were agreeable to all; for the Gothic patriots wished,
above everything, to avoid being split into parties at the outbreak of
the war.

And while Earl Witichis, in his great sense of justice, desired that
the right of defence against all accusations should be granted, Teja
also acknowledged that, as the enemy had hurled the terrible accusation
of regicide at the Gothic nation, the national honour could only be
upheld by a strict and formal inquiry, and not by tumultuous popular
justice founded on blind suspicion.

Gothelindis looked forward with confidence to her trial; though the
voice of moral conviction might be against her, she firmly believed
that no sufficient proof of her guilt could be advanced. Had not her
eye alone seen the end of her enemy? And she knew that she would not be
condemned without a full conviction. So she willingly returned to
Ravenna, encouraged the coward heart of her husband, and hoped, when
the day of trial had passed, to find security from all further
molestation in the camp of Belisarius and the court of Byzantium.

The confidence of the royal couple as to the result of the trial was
heightened by the circumstance that the arming of the Franks had given
them a pretext for despatching, besides Witichis and Hildebad, the
dangerous Earl Teja with a third detachment to the north-west of the
peninsula. With him went many thousands of the most zealous adherents
of the National Party, so that the assembly near Rome would not be
overcrowded by adversaries.

And they were ceaselessly employed in gathering together their personal
adherents, as well as the old opponents of Amalaswintha, and the mighty
kindred of the Balthes in all its far-spread branches, in order to
secure friendly voices for the important day.

In this way they had gained composure and confidence. Theodahad had
been persuaded by Gothelindis to appear himself as the advocate of his
wife, in order that such a show of courage and the respect imposed by
his royal person might perhaps, from the very commencement, intimidate
all opponents.

Surrounded by their adherents and a small bodyguard, Theodahad and
Gothelindis left Ravenna and hastened to Rome, where they arrived a few
days before the time appointed for the Assembly, and took up their
quarters in the old imperial palace.

Not immediately before the walls, but in the vicinity of Rome, upon an
open plain called Regeta, between Anaqui and Terracina, was the
Assembly to be held.

Early on the morning of the day on which Theodahad was about to
set forth alone on his journey thither, and while he was taking
leave of Gothelindis, an unexpected and unwelcome visitor was
announced--Cethegus, who had never before made his appearance during
their stay of some days in Rome. He had been fully occupied by the
completion of the fortifications.

As he entered, Gothelindis, struck by his gloomy aspect, cried:

"For God's sake, what evil news do you bring?"

The Prefect only knit his brows, and answered quietly:

"Evil news? For him whom it hurts! I come from a meeting of my friends,
where I first learned what all Rome will soon know. Belisarius has
landed!"

"At last!" exclaimed Theodahad.

And the Queen also could not conceal an expression of triumph.

"Do not rejoice too soon; you may repent it. I do not come to call you
and your friend Petros to account; he who treats with traitors must be
prepared for lies. I only come to tell you that you are now most
certainly lost."

"Lost?"

"We are saved!"

"No, Queen. Belisarius, on landing, published a manifesto. He says that
he comes to punish the murderers of Amalaswintha. A high price and his
favour are assured to those who give you up, alive or dead."

Theodahad grew pale.

"Impossible!" cried Gothelindis.

"And the Goths will soon learn to whose treachery they owe the
unresisted entrance of the enemy into the country. Still more. I am
charged by the city of Rome, as its Prefect, to care for its well-being
in this stormy time. I shall arrest you in the name of Rome, and
deliver you into the hands of Belisarius."

"That you dare not do!" cried Gothelindis, laying her hand upon her
dagger.

"Peace, Gothelindis! Here there is no helpless woman to be murdered in
a bath. But I will let you free--what to me matters your life or
death?--at a moderate price."

"I will grant anything!" stammered Theodahad.

"You will deliver up to me the documents of your contract with
Silverius--be silent! Do not lie! I know that you have treated with him
long and secretly. Once again you have carried on a fine trade with
land and people. I should like to have the bill of sale."

"The sale is now null; the documents without effect. Take them! They
are deposited in the Basilica of St. Martin, in the sarcophagus on the
left of the crypt."

Theodahad's terror proved that he spoke the truth.

"It is well," said Cethegus. "All the exits of the palace are guarded
by my legionaries. I will first get the documents. If I find them in
the stated place, I shall give orders to let you pass. If you then wish
to fly, go to the Porta Marcus Aurelius, and name my name to the
tribune of the guard, Piso; he will let you depart."

He turned and went out, leaving the pair in a state of helpless alarm.

"What shall we do?" said Gothelindis, more to herself than to her
husband. "Shall we yield or defy them?"

"What shall we do?" repeated Theodahad impatiently. "Defy them? that
means stay here? Nonsense! Away as soon as possible. There is no safety
but in flight!"

"Whither will you fly?"

"First to Ravenna--it is strong! There I will take the royal treasure.
From thence, if it must be, to the Franks. Oh, what a pity that I must
leave all the moneys hidden here--many millions of solidi!"

"Here? Here, too?" asked Gothelindis, her attention suddenly aroused.
"You have treasures hidden in Rome? Where? And are they safe?"

"Ah, far too safe! In the Catacombs! I myself should be hours in
finding them all in those dark labyrinths; and minutes are now death or
life, and life is more than solidis! Follow me, Gothelindis, so that
we may not lose a moment. I hasten to the Porta Marcus Aurelius."

And he left the chamber.
But Gothelindis remained motionless. A thought, a plan had crossed her
mind at his words. She contemplated the possibility of resistance. Her
pride could not endure to renounce the government.

"Gold is power," she said to herself, "and power alone is life."

Her resolution was firmly fixed. She thought of the Cappadocian
mercenaries, whom the avarice of the King had driven from his service;
they still remained in Rome, masterless, waiting to embark.

She heard Theodahad hastily descend the staircase, and call for his
litter.

"Fly, fly! thou miserable coward!" she cried, "I will remain here!"



                              CHAPTER XII.

Splendidly rose the sun out of the sea the next morning. Its beams
glittered upon the shining weapons of many thousand Gothic warriors,
who crowded the wide levels of Regeta.

From all the provinces of the kingdom they had hastened by groups, in
families, often with wife and child, to be present at the great muster
which took place every autumn.

Such an Assembly was at once a splendid feast, and the highest national
solemnity. Originally, in heathen times, its immediate intention had
been the grand feast of sacrifice, which, twice a year, at the winter
and the summer solstice, had united all branches of the nation in
honour of their common gods; to this were added a market and exchange
of goods, exercises of arms, and the review of the army. The Assembly
had the power of the highest jurisdiction, and the final decision as to
peace, war, and political relations with other states.

And even now, in the Christian time, when the King had acquired many a
right which once belonged to the people, the National Assembly
possessed a high solemnity, although its ancient heathen significance
was forgotten.

The remains of the old liberties of the people, which even the powerful
Theodoric had not contested, revived under his weak descendants.

A majority of free Goths had still to pronounce sentence, and to award
punishment, even though the King's Earl conducted the proceedings in
his name, and fulfilled the sentence.

Often already had Germanic nations themselves accused, judged, and
executed their kings, on account of treachery, murder, or other heavy
crimes, before a Free Assembly of the people.

In the proud consciousness that he was his own master, and served none,
not even the King, beyond the limit of freedom, the German went in full
armour to the "Ting," where he felt himself safe and strong in union
with his fellows, and saw the liberties, strength, and honour of
himself and his countrymen represented in living pictures before his
eyes.

To the Assembly of which we now speak, the Goths had been attracted by
peculiarly strong reasons. When the summons to meet at Regeta was
published, the war with Byzantium was expected or already declared; the
nation rejoiced at the coming struggle with their hated enemy, and were
glad to muster their forces beforehand. This time the Assembly was to
be, more than ever, a grand review.

Besides this, most of the Goths in the adjacent places knew that
judgment was to be passed on the murderers of the daughter of
Theodoric, and the great excitement caused by this treacherous act had
also contributed to draw the people to Regeta.

While a portion of those assembled had been received by friends and
relatives in the nearest villages, great numbers had--already some days
before the formal opening of the Assembly--encamped in light tents and
huts upon the wide plain, two hundred and eighty stadii distant from
Rome.

At the earliest dawn of day these groups were already in noisy
movement, and employed the time during which they were yet masters of
the place, in various games and pastimes.

Some swam and bathed in the clear waters of the rapid river Ufen (or
"Decemnovius," thus named because it flowed into the sea at Terracina,
nineteen miles off), which crossed the plain. Others displayed their
skill in leaping over whole rows of outstretched spears, or, almost
naked, in dancing amid brandished swords, while others again--and these
the fleetest-footed--clinging to the manes of their horses, kept step
with their swiftest gallop, and when arrived at the goal, securely
swung themselves upon their unsaddled backs.

"What a pity," cried young Gudila, who was the first to arrive at the
goal in one of these races, and now stroked his yellow locks out of his
eyes, "what a pity that Totila is not present! He is the best rider in
the nation, and has always beaten me. But now, with this horse, I would
try again with him."

"I am glad that he is not here," said Gunthamund, who had arrived
second, "else I had scarcely won the first prize in hurling the lance
yesterday."

"Yes," said Hilderich, a stately young warrior in a jingling suit of
mail, "Totila is clever at the lance. But black Teja throws still
better; he can tell you beforehand which rib he will hit."

"Pshaw!" grumbled Hunibad, an elderly man, who had looked critically at
the performance of the youths, "all that is only play. In bloody
earnest the sword is the only weapon that serves a man at the last,
when death so presses on him from all sides that he has no space for
throwing. And for that I praise Earl Witichis, of Fæsulæ! He is _my_
man! What a breaking of skulls was there in the war with the Gepidæ!
The man cleaved through steel and leather as if it were dry straw! He
is still more valiant than my own duke, Guntharis the Wölfung, in
Florentia. But what do you youngsters know about it?--Look! the first
arrivals are coming down the hill. Up! let us go to meet them!"

And now people came streaming in on all the roads; on foot, on
horseback, and in wagons. A noisy and turbulent crowd filled all the
plain.

On the shores of the river, where stood most of the tents, the horses
were unharnessed, and the wagons pushed together to form a barricade.
Through the lanes of the camp the ever-increasing crowd now streamed.
There friends and acquaintances, who had not met for years, sought and
greeted each other.

It was a gay and chequered scene, for the old Germanic equality had
long since disappeared from the kingdom.

There stood near the aristocratic noble, who had settled in one of
the rich Italian towns, who lived in the palaces of senatorial
families, and had adopted the more luxuriant and polite customs of the
Italians; near the duke or earl from Mediolanum or Ticinum, who wore a
shoulder-belt of purple silk across his richly-gilt armour; near such a
dainty lord towered some rough, gigantic Gothic peasant, who lived in
the thick oak-forests on the Margus in M[oe]sia, or who had fought the
wolf in the forests by the rushing [OE]nus for the ragged skin which he
carried over his bear-like shoulders, and whose harsh-sounding speech
struck strangely on the ear of his half-Romanised companion.

There came strong and war-hardened men from the distant Augusta
Vindelicorum on the Licus, who day and night defended the rotten walls
of that outermost northern fortress of the Gothic kingdom against the
wild Su[=e]vi.

And here were peaceful shepherds from Dacia, who, possessing neither
field nor house, wandered with their flocks from pasture to pasture,
still living in the manner introduced into the West by their ancestors
from Asia a thousand years ago.

There was a rich Goth, who, in Rome or Ravenna, had married the
daughter of some Italian moneychanger, and had soon learned to do
business like his father-in-law, and reckon his profits by thousands.

And here stood a poor Alpine shepherd, who drove his meagre goats on to
the meagre pastures near the noisy Isarcus, and who erected his hut of
planks close to the den of the bear.

So differently had the die been cast for the thousands who were here
met together, since their fathers had followed the call of the great
Theodoric to the West, away from the valleys of the Hæmus.

But still they felt that they were brothers, the sons of one nation;
they spoke the same proud language, they had the same golden locks,
the same snowy skins, the same light and sparkling eyes, and--above
all--the same feeling in their hearts: "We stand as victors on the
ground that our fathers forced from the Roman Empire, and which we will
defend to the death."

Like an immense swarm of bees the masses hummed and buzzed, greeting
each other, seeking old acquaintances and concluding new friendships;
and the chaotic tumult seemed as if it would never end.

But suddenly the peculiar long-drawn tones of the Gothic horn were
heard from the crown of the hill, and at once the storm of the thousand
voices was laid.

All eyes were eagerly turned in the direction of the hill, from which a
procession of venerable men now approached.

It was formed of half a hundred men in white and flowing mantles, their
heads crowned with ivy, carrying white staffs and ancient stone axes.
They were the sajones or soldiers of the tribunal, whose office it was
to carry out the ceremonial forms of opening, warding, and closing the
"Ting."

Arrived on the plain, they greeted with a triple long-drawn flourish
the assembly of free warriors; who, after a solemn silence, answered
with the clash and clang of their arms.

The ban-officers shortly began their work.

They divided to the right and left, and enclosed the whole wide field
with red woollen cords, which they wound round hazel staffs fixed into
the earth at every twenty steps; accompanying this action with the
repetition of ancient songs and sayings.

Exactly opposite the rising and setting of the sun, the woollen cords
were raised over the shafts of tall lances, so that they formed the two
gates of the now completely enclosed "Ting-place;" and these entrances
were guarded by soldiers with drawn swords, in order to keep all
strangers and women at a distance.

When all was arranged, the two oldest of the men stepped beneath the
spear-gates and called in a loud voice:

           "According to ancient Gothic custom
            Is the fence erected.
            Now, with God's help,
            The judgment may begin."

After the pause which ensued, there arose a low murmur amongst the
crowd, which gradually grew into a loud, and, at last, almost deafening
uproar of questioning, disputing, and doubting voices.

It had been already remarked, as the procession advanced, that it was
not, as usual, led by the Earl who was accustomed to hold and conduct
the "Ting" in the name and ban of the King. But it had been expected
that this representative of the King would make his appearance during
the ceremony of enclosing the place. When, therefore, this work was
accomplished, and the sentence of the old men called for the
commencement of the tribunal, and still no earl or officer had
appeared, who alone could pronounce the opening speech, the attention
of all present was directed to this deficiency, so difficult to be
supplied.

While everywhere the people asked and sought for the Earl, or some
representative of the King, it was remembered that the King himself had
announced that he would appear in person before his people, to defend
himself and his Queen against the heavy accusation brought against
them.

But when the leaders of the people now sought for the friends and
partisans of the King, to question them concerning him, they discovered
the suspicious fact--which, till now, had been overlooked in the
confusion of general greetings--that not one of the numerous relations,
friends or servants of the royal family, whose duty, privilege, and
interest it was to appear in support of the accused, were present at
the meeting, although they had been seen in numbers, a few days ago, in
the streets and neighbourhood of Rome.

This circumstance excited surprise and suspicion; and for some time it
seemed as if, in consequence of the tumult caused by this singular fact
and the absence of the Earl, the formal commencement of the whole
proceedings would be rendered impossible.

Many speakers had already tried in vain to gain a hearing.

All at once, from the middle of the crowd, a sound was heard, similar
to the battle-cry of some fearful monster, which drowned all other
noises.

All eyes were turned in the direction whence the sound proceeded, and
in the middle of the place, leaning against a lofty ilex-tree, was seen
the tall form of a man, who shouted the Gothic war-cry into the hollow
of his bronze shield, which he held before his mouth.

As the shield dropped, it discovered the powerful face of old
Hildebrand, whose eyes seemed to flash fire.

Enthusiastic applause greeted the appearance of the old and well-known
master-at-arms of the great Theodoric, who, like his master, had, by
means of song and proverb, become a mythic figure amongst the Goths
while still living.

As the applause died away the old man commenced:

"Good Goths! my brave brothers! It troubles and surprises you that you
see no Earl, and no representative of the man who wears your crown. Do
not let it disturb you! If the King thinks thereby to interrupt this
meeting, he is mistaken. I still remember old times, and I tell you,
the people can judge what is right without the King, and hold the
tribunal without the King's Earl. You are all grown up amongst new
manners and customs, but there stands old Haduswinth, scarcely a few
winters younger than myself; he will bear me witness that power is with
the people alone; the Gothic nation is free!"

"Yes! we are free!" cried a thousand voices.

"If the King does not send his Earl, we will choose our 'Ting-Earl'
ourselves," cried the grey-haired Haduswinth; "right and justice
existed before King and Earl! And who knows the old customs of the
nation better than Hildebrand, son of Hilding? Hildebrand shall be our
Ting-Earl!"

"Yes!" was echoed on all sides; "Hildebrand shall be our Ting-Earl!"

"You have chosen me," now said Hildebrand, "and I count myself as well
elected as if King Theodahad had given me a warrant in letter and
parchment. And my ancestors for centuries have often held tribunals for
the Goths. Come, sajones, help me to open the Assembly."

In front of the oak there still lay the ruins of an ancient fane of the
wood-god Picus; the sajones cleared the place, piled up the broadest
stones, and leaned two square slabs to the right and left against the
trunks of the oak, so that a stately seat of justice was thus formed.
And so before the altar of the old Italic sylvan god, the Gothic Earl
held a tribunal.

Other sajones threw a wide blue woollen mantle with a broad white
collar over Hildebrand's shoulders, and gave him an ashen staff, curved
at the top. At his left hand, on the branches of the oak, they hung a
shining shield of burnished steel, and then placed themselves in two
groups on his right and on his left. The old man struck the shield with
his staff till it rung loudly. Then he seated himself with his face to
the east and began:

"I enjoin silence, ban, and peace! I enjoin right and forbid wrong,
quick anger, biting words, ready blows, and everything which can offend
the peace of the Ting. And I ask: is it the year and day, the time and
hour, the place and spot in which to hold a free tribunal of Gothic
men?"

The Goths who stood the nearest stepped forward and answered in chorus:

"Here is the right place, under the wide sky, under the rustling oak;
now is the right time, with a climbing sun, to hold a free tribunal of
Gothic men on the sword-won soil of our Gothic inheritance."

"We are assembled," continued old Hildebrand, "to decide upon two
cases: an accusation of murder against Gothelindis the Queen, and of
cowardice and negligence, in this time of great danger, against
Theodahad our King. I ask----"

But his speech was interrupted by the loud flourish of horns, which
sounded nearer and nearer from the west.



                             CHAPTER XIII.

The Goths turned in astonishment, and saw a troop of horsemen hurrying
down the hill in the direction of the place of justice.

The sun flashed upon the armed figures with such dazzling brilliancy
that they could not be recognised, although they approached rapidly.

But old Hildebrand rose up in his elevated seat, shaded his eagle eyes
with his hand, and at once exclaimed:

"Those are Gothic weapons! The waving banner bears the figure of the
scales: that is the crest of Earl Witichis! and there he is himself at
the head of the troop! and the tall figure on his left is the sturdy
Hildebad! What brings the generals back? Their troops should be far on
their way to Gaul and Dalmatia."

There ensued an uproar of excited voices. Meanwhile the riders had
reached the place and sprang from their smoking horses. Received with
enthusiasm, the two generals, Witichis and Hildebad, went through the
crowd up to Hildebrand's judgment-seat.

"What?" cried Hildebad, still out of breath; "you sit here and hold a
tribunal as if in time of peace, and the enemy Belisarius has landed!"

"We know it," answered Hildebrand quietly, "and would have held counsel
with the King how best to check him."

"With the King!" laughed Hildebad bitterly.

"He is not here," said Witichis, looking round; "that confirms our
suspicion. We returned because we had cause for grave mistrust. But of
that later. Continue where you were interrupted. Everything according
to right and order! Peace, friend!"

And, pushing the impatient Hildebad back, he modestly placed himself on
the left of the judgment-seat amongst the others.

After all had become still, the old man continued:

"Gothelindis, our Queen, is accused of the murder of Amalaswintha, the
daughter of Theodoric. I ask: are we a tribunal to judge such a cause?"

Old Haduswinth, leaning upon his club, advanced a step and said:

"Red are the cords which enclose this place of execution. The National
Assembly has the right to judge red-handed crime; warm life and cold
death. If it has been ordered otherwise in late times, it has been by
force and not by right. We _are_ a tribunal to judge such a cause."

"Through all the nation," resumed Hildebrand, "a heavy reproach is made
against Gothelindis; in the depths of our hearts we accuse her. But who
will accuse her here, in open assembly, in audible words, of this
murder?"

"I," cried a loud voice, and a handsome young Goth in shining armour
stepped forward, on the right of the judge, laying his hand upon his
heart.

A murmur of approbation ran through the crowd.

"He loves the beautiful Mataswintha!"

"He is the brother of Duke Guntharis of Tuscany, who holds Florentia."

"He is her wooer."

"He comes forward as the avenger of her mother."

"I, Earl Arahad of Asta, the son of Aramuth, of the noble race of the
Wölfungs," continued the young Goth with an engaging blush. "It is
true, I am not akin to the murdered Princess; but the men of her
family, Theodahad foremost, her cousin and her King, do not fulfil
their duty as blood-avengers. Is not Theodahad himself abettor and
hider of the murder? I, then, a free and unblemished Goth of noble
blood, a friend of the late unhappy Princess, complain on behalf of her
daughter, Mataswintha. I appeal against murder! I appeal against
blood!"

And, amidst the loud applause of the Assembly, the stately youth drew
his sword and laid it straight before him upon the seat of justice.

"And thy proofs? Speak!"

"Hold, Ting-Earl," cried a grave voice, and Witichis stepped forward
opposite to the complainant. "Art thou so old, and knowest so well what
is just, Master Hildebrand, and allowest thyself to be carried away by
the pressure of the multitude? Must I remind thee, I, the younger man,
of the first law of all justice? I hear the complainant, but not the
accused."

"No woman may enter the Ting of the Goths," said Hildebrand quietly.

"I know it; but where is Theodahad, her husband and defender?"

"He has not appeared."

"Is he invited?"

"He is invited, upon my oath and that of these messengers," cried
Arahad. "Step forth, sajones!"

Two of the officers came forward and touched the judgment-seat with
their staffs.

"Well," continued Witichis, "it shall never be said that a woman was
judged by the people of the Goths unheard and undefended. However she
may be hated, she has a right to be heard and protected. I will be her
defender and pleader."

And he went towards the youthful complainant, likewise drawing his
sword.

A pause of respectful admiration followed.

"So thou deniest the deed?"

"I say it is not proven."

"Prove it!" said the judge, turning to Arahad.

The latter, unprepared for a formal proceedings and not ready to cope
with an opponent of Witichis's weight and steady composure, was
somewhat embarrassed.

"Prove?" he cried impatiently. "What need of proof? Thou, I, all the
Goths know that Gothelindis hated the Princess long and bitterly. The
Princess disappears from Ravenna; at the same time her murderess also.
The victim is discovered in a house belonging to Gothelindis--dead; and
the murderess escapes to a fortified castle. What need, then, of
proof?"

And he looked with impatience at the Goths near him.

"And on this argument thou wilt accuse the Queen of murder before the
open Ting?" asked Witichis quietly. "Truly may the day be far distant
when a verdict is founded upon such evidence! Justice, my men, is light
and air. Woe, woe to the nation which makes its hatred its justice! I
myself hate this woman and her husband; but where I hate I am doubly
strict."

He said this in so simple and noble a manner, that the hearts of all
present were touched.

"Where are the proofs!" now asked Hildebrand. "Hast thou a palpable act?
Hast thou a visible appearance? Hast thou an important word? Hast thou
a true oath? Dost thou claim the oath of innocence from the accused?"

"Proof!" again repeated Arahad angrily. "I have none but the conviction
within my heart!"

"Then," said Hildebrand----

But at this moment a soldier made his way to him from the gate, and
said:

"Romans stand at the entrance. They beg for a hearing. They say they
know all about the death of the Princess."

"I demand that they be heard!" cried Arahad eagerly. "Not as
complainants, but as witnesses of the complainant."

Hildebrand made a sign, and the soldier hastened to bring up the Romans
through the curious throng.

Foremost came a man, bent with years, wearing a hair shirt, and a rope
tied round his loins; the cowl of his mantle hid his features. Two men
in the habit of slaves followed. Questioning looks were fixed upon the
old man, whose bearing, in spite of simplicity and even poverty, was
full of dignity and nobility.

When he reached Hildebrand's seat, Arahad looked closely into his face,
and started back in surprise.

"Who is it," asked the judge, "whom thou callest as a witness to thy
words? An unknown stranger?"

"No," cried Arahad, and threw back the old man's mantle. "A man whom
you all know and honour--Marcus Aurelius Cassiodorus."

A cry of general surprise arose from the Ting-place.

"Such was my name," said the witness, "during the time of my worldly
existence; now only Brother Marcus."

An expression of holy resignation beamed from his features.

"Well, Brother Marcus," responded Hildebrand, "what hast thou to tell
us of Amalaswintha's death? Tell the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth."

"I will. Know, first, that it is not the striving after human requital
which brings me here. I do not come to avenge the murder. 'Vengeance is
mine; I will repay,' saith the Lord. No; I am here to fulfil the last
wish of the unhappy woman, the daughter of my great King."

He took a roll of papyrus out of his dress.

"Shortly before her flight from Ravenna, Amalaswintha directed these
lines to me, which I have to communicate to you as her legacy to the
nation of the Goths. These are her words:

"'The thanks of a contrite heart for thy friendship. Still more than
the hope of safety, I am comforted by the feeling that I have not lost
thy attachment. Yes, I will hasten to thy villa in the Lake of Bolsena.
Does not the road lead thence to Rome, to Regeta, where I will confess
before my Goths, and atone for my crime? I will die, if it must be; but
not by the hands of my enemies. No; by the verdict of my people, whom
I, blind fool, have ruined! I have deserved death, not only for the
murder of the three dukes--who, let it be known to all, died through
me--but still more for the madness with which I repulsed my people for
the sake of Byzantium. If I reach Regeta alive, I will warn my people
with my last breath, and cry: Fear Byzantium! Justinian is false as
hell, and there can be no peace between him and us! But I will warn
them also of inner enemies. King Theodahad plots treason; he has sold
Italy and the Gothic crown to the ambassador of Byzantium; he has done
I refused to do. Be cautious, strong, and united! Would that' dying, I
could expiate the crimes committed while living.'"

The people had listened in deep silence to these words, read by
Cassiodorus in a trembling voice, and which seemed to come to them from
the other side of the grave.

When he ceased, compassion and sorrow prolonged this silence.

At last old Hildebrand rose and said:

"She has erred; she has made atonement. Daughter of Theodoric, the
nation of the Goths forgives thy crime, and thanks thee for thy
fidelity."

"So may God forgive her; amen!" said Cassiodorus.

He then continued:

"I never invited her to my villa; I could not do so. Fourteen days
before I had sold all my property to Queen Gothelindis."

"Therefore her enemy," interrupted Arahad, "misusing his name, decoyed
Amalaswintha into that house. Canst thou deny this. Earl Witichis?"

"No," answered he. "But," he continued, turning to Cassiodorus, "hast
thou also proof that the Princess did not die an accidental death
there? that Gothelindis caused her death!"

"Come forth, Syrus, and speak!" said Cassiodorus. "I answer for the
truth of this man."

The slave advanced, bent his head reverently, and said:

"For twenty years I have had the superintendence of the sluices of the
lake and the waterworks of the baths in the villa; none beside me knew
the secret. When Queen Gothelindis bought the estate, all the slaves
and personal servants of Cassiodorus were sent away; I alone remained.
Early one morning, the Princess Amalaswintha landed at the island, and
the Queen soon followed. The latter at once sent for me, said she would
take a bath, and ordered me to give her the keys of all the sluices of
the lake and the pipes of the baths, and to explain to her the whole
plan of the works. I obeyed; gave her the keys and the plan drawn upon
parchment, but warned her seriously not to open all the sluices, nor to
let all the pipes play, for it might cost her her life. But she angrily
rebuked me, and I heard that she ordered her slave to fill the kettles,
not with warm, but with hot water. I went away; but, anxious for her
safety, I remained in the vicinity of the baths. After some time, I
heard, by the violent roaring and rushing, that notwithstanding, and in
spite of, my advice, the Queen had let in the whole water of the lake.
At the same time I heard the steaming water rise hissing through all
the pipes in the walls; and, as it seemed to me, I heard, dulled by the
marble walls, fearful cries for help. I hurried to the outer gallery of
the baths to save the Queen. But what was my surprise when, at the
central point of the works, at the Medusa's head, I saw the Queen, whom
I thought in danger of death in the bath, standing quietly outside,
completely clothed. She pressed the springs, and exchanged angry words
with some one who was calling for help within. Horrified, and partly
guessing what was going forward, I crept away, happily unobserved."

"What, coward?" cried Witichis, "thou couldst guess what was passing
and creep away!"

"I am only a slave, sir, no hero, and if the Queen had noticed me, I
should certainly not be standing here to bear witness against her.
Shortly afterwards a report was spread that the Princess Amalaswintha
was drowned in the bath."

Loud murmurs and angry cries rang through the assembled crowd.

Arahad cried triumphantly: "Now, Earl Witichis, wilt thou still defend
her?"

"No," answered Witichis, and sheathed his sword, "I defend no
murderess! My office is at an end."

With this he went over from the left to the right, amongst the
accusers.

"You, ye free Goths, have now to find the verdict, and administer
justice," said Hildebrand. "I have only to execute what you pronounce;
so I ask you, ye men of judgment, what think ye of this accusation,
which Earl Arahad, son of Aramuth the Wölfung, has brought against
Gothelindis, the Queen? Speak! is she guilty of murder?"

"Guilty! guilty!" shouted many thousand voices, and not a voice said
"no."

"She is guilty," said the old man, rising. "Speak, complainant, what
punishment dost thou demand for this crime?"

Arahad lifted his sword towards heaven.

"I appealed against murder, I appealed against blood! She shall die the
death!"

And before Hildebrand could put his question to the people, the crowd
was filled with angry emotion, every man's sword flew from its sheath
and flashed in the sun, and every voice shouted, "She shall die the
death!"

The words rolled like a terrible thunder, bearing the people's judgment
over the wide plain till the echo died away in the distance.

"She dies the death," said Hildebrand, "by the axe. Up, soldiers, and
search for her."


"Hold," cried Hildebad, coming forward, "our sentence will be hard to
fulfil, so long as this woman is the wife of our King. Therefore I
demand that the Assembly at once examine into the accusation that we
carry in our hearts against Theodahad, who governs a people of heroes
so unheroically. I will give words to this accusation. Mark well, I
accuse him of treachery, not only of incapability to lead and save us.
I will be silent on the fact that, without his knowledge, his Queen
could scarcely have cooled her hate in Amalaswintha's blood; I will not
speak of the warning which the latter sent to us, in her last words,
against Theodahad's treachery; but is it not true that he deprived the
whole southern portion of the realm of men, weapons, horses, and ships?
that he sent all the forces to the Alps, so that the degenerate Greeks
won Sicily, and entered Italy without a blow? My poor brother, Totila,
stands alone against them, with a mere handful of soldiers. Instead of
defending his rear, the King sent Witichis, Teja and me to the north.
We obeyed with heavy hearts, for we guessed where Belisarius would
land. We advanced slowly, expecting to be recalled at every moment. In
vain. Already there ran a report through the places which we passed
that Sicily was lost, and the Italians, who saw us march to the north,
pulled mocking faces. We had accomplished a few days' march along the
coast, when a letter from my brother Totila reached me: 'Has then, like
the King, the whole nation, and my brother also, forsaken and forgotten
me?' it said. 'Belisarius has taken Sicily by surprise. He has landed
in Italy. The population join him. He presses forward to Neapolis. I
have written four letters to King Theodahad for help. All in vain.
Received not a single sail. Neapolis is in great danger. Save, save
Neapolis and the kingdom!'"

A cry of dismay and anger ran through the listening crowd.

"I wanted," continued Hildebad, "to return immediately with all our
thousands, but Earl Witichis, my commander, would not suffer it. I
could only persuade him to halt the troops, and hasten here with a few
horsemen to warn, to save, to revenge! For I cry for revenge, revenge
upon King Theodahad. It was not only folly and weakness, it was
knavery, to expose the south to the enemy. This letter proves it. My
brother warned him four times in vain. He delivered him and the realm
into the enemy's hands. Woe to us if Neapolis falls, or has already
fallen! Ha! he who is guilty of this shall reign no longer, no longer
live! Tear the crown of the Goths, which he has dishonoured, from his
head! Down with him! Let him die!"

"Down with him! Let him die!" thundered the people, in a mighty echo.

The storm of their fury seemed irresistible, and capable of destroying
whatever opposed it.

Only one man remained quiet and composed in the midst of the turbulent
crowd. It was Earl Witichis. He sprang upon one of the old stones
beneath the oak, and waited till the tumult was somewhat appeased.

Then he lifted his voice, and spoke with the clear simplicity which so
well became him.

"Countrymen! companions! hear me! You are wrong in your sentence. Woe
to us if, in the Gothic nation, by whom, since the days of our
forefathers, right has been ever honoured, hate and force should sit on
the throne of justice! Theodahad is a bad and weak King. He shall no
longer hold the reins of the kingdom alone. Give him a guardian, as if
to a minor! Depose him if you like; but you may not demand his death,
his blood! Where is the proof of his treachery? or that Totila's
message reached him? See, you are silent! Be wary of injustice! It
destroys nations!"

As he stood on his elevated place in the full blaze of the sun, he
looked great and noble, full of power and dignity. The eyes of the
multitude rested with admiration upon him who seemed so superior to
them all in nobility, temperance, and clear-sighted composure. A solemn
pause followed.

Before Hildebad and the people could find an answer to the man who
seemed to be Justice personified, the general attention was drawn away
to the thick forest which bounded the view to the south, and which
suddenly seemed to become alive.



                              CHAPTER XIV.

For the quick trampling of approaching horses and the jingling of
armour was heard in the wood, and soon a little group of horsemen
appeared issuing from under the trees, and far in front galloped a man
on a coal-black charger, which sped on as if rivalling the rushing of
the wind.

The long black locks of the rider waved in the air, as well as the
thick black mane which formed the crest of his helmet. Bending
forwards, he urged his foaming horse to greater speed, and as he
reached the southern entrance to the Ting, sprang from his saddle with
a clash.

All gave way as they met the furious glance of his eye. His handsome
face was ghastly pale.

He rushed up the incline, sprang upon a stone near Witichis, held on
high a roll of parchment, cried with a last effort, "Treachery!
treachery!" and fell prone, as if struck by lightning.

Witichis and Hildebad ran to him; they had barely recognised their
friend.

"Teja! Teja!" they cried, "what has happened? Speak!"

"Speak," repeated Witichis once more, "it concerns the kingdom!"

At this word the steel-clad man raised himself with a superhuman
effort, looked about him for a moment, and then said in a hollow voice:

"We are betrayed, Goths! betrayed by our King! Six days ago I received
orders to go to Istria, not to Neapolis, as I had begged. I felt
suspicious, but I obeyed, and embarked with my thousands. A violent
storm drove numerous small vessels towards us from the west. Amongst
them was the _Mercurius_, the swift-sailing post-boat of Theodahad. I
knew the vessel well; she once belonged to my father. As soon as she
caught sight of our ships, she tried to evade us. I, mistrustful,
chased her and overtook her. Her captain carried a letter to Byzantium,
in the handwriting of the King. 'You will be content with me, great
general,' it said, 'all the Gothic forces are at this moment on the
north-east of Rome; you can land without danger. I have destroyed four
letters from the Count of the Harbour of Neapolis, and thrown his
messengers into a dungeon. In requital, I expect that you will
punctually fulfil our contract, and shortly pay me the price fixed.'"

Teja let the letter fall; his voice died away.

The people uttered deep groans of rage.

"I at once turned and landed, and have galloped here for three days and
nights without pause. I can no more."

And, staggering, he sank into the arms of Witichis.

Then old Hildebrand sprang upon the highest stone of his seat, so that
he towered above the crowd. He tore a lance, which bore a small marble
bust of the King upon its cross-stick, out of the hands of the bearer,
and held it aloft in his left hand. In his right he raised his
stone-axe.

"Sold!" he cried. "He has sold his people for yellow gold! Down with
him! Down, down!"

And with a stroke of his axe he shattered the bust.

This action was the first thunder-clap that unchained the brooding
tempest. Only to be compared to the strife of the elements was the wild
storm which now arose amongst the multitude.

"Down with him! down with Theodahad!" was repeated a thousand times,
accompanied by the deafening clash of arms.

Amidst this tumult the old master-at-arms again lifted up his metallic
voice, silence once more ensued, and he said solemnly:

"Hear it, God in heaven, and men on earth: all-seeing sun and blowing
wind, hear it! Whereas King Theodahad, the son of Theodis, has betrayed
people and kingdom to the enemy; the nation of the Goths, free and full
of ancient fame and born to bear arms, depose him from the throne. We
deprive thee, Theodahad, of the golden crown and of the kingdom; of
Gothic right and of life. And we do this not wrongly, but rightly. For
under all our kings we have been ever free, and we would rather want
kings than want freedom. No king stands so high, that he may not be
judged by his people for murder, treachery, and perjury. So I deprive
thee of crown, kingdom, right, and life. Outlawed shalt thou be,
contemned, dishonoured. As far as Christians pray in their churches,
and heathens sacrifice on their altars; as far as fire burns and earth
grows green; as far as the falcon can fly a whole day when the wind
supports his wings; as far as ships sail and shields shine; as far as
heaven spreads its vault and the world extends; house and hall, and the
companionship of good people, and all dwelling shall be denied thee,
except hell alone. Thy inheritance I divide amongst the Gothic people.
Thy flesh and blood I give to the ravens of the air. And whoever
findeth thee, in hall or court, in a house or on the high-road, shall
slay thee unpunished, and shall be thanked for his deed by the good
Goths, and blessed by God. I ask you, men of justice, shall it be
thus?"

"It shall be thus!" answered the crowd, and struck their swords upon
their shields.

Hildebrand had scarcely descended from the stone, when old Haduswinth
took his place, threw back his shaggy bear-skin, and spoke:

"We are rid of the perjured king! He will meet with an avenger. But
now, true men, we must choose another king. For we have never been
without one. As far back as legend and story reach, our forefathers
have lifted a king upon the shield, the living symbol of the power,
glory, and fortune of the good Goths. So long as Goths exist, they will
have kings; and as long as a king can be found, the nation will endure.
And now it is more than ever necessary that we should have a head, a
leader. The race of the Amelungs rose like the sun in glory--Theodoric,
its brightest star, shone for a long time; but this sun has been
shamefully extinguished in Theodahad. Up! people of the Goths, ye are
free! Freely choose a rightful king, who will lead you to victory and
glory! The throne is vacant. Goths, I call upon you to choose a king!"

"Let us choose a king!" was the answer, in a solemn and mighty chorus.

Then Witichis mounted the Ting-seat, took off his helmet, and raised
his right hand.

"Thou, God, who rulest the stars, knowest that we are not moved by
unwise delight in disobedience, or by wantonness. We use the sacred
right of necessity. We honour the right of royalty, the glory which
beams from the crown; but this glory is dimmed. And in the great need
of the nation, we exercise a people's highest right. Heralds shall go
forth to all the peoples of the earth, and announce that, not because
we despise, but because we honour, the crown, have we acted thus. But,
for God's sake, no disputes, no quarrels now; now, when the enemy is in
the land! Therefore let us first solemnly swear, that he who has
the majority, were it only of _one_ voice, we will all honour as our
king--him and no other. I swear it--swear with me."

"We swear!" cried the Goths,

But young Arahad did not join in the oath. Ambition and love flamed in
his heart. He remembered that after the fall of the Balthes and the
Amelungs, his house was the oldest in the nation. He hoped to win
Mataswintha's hand, if he could offer her a crown; and scarcely had the
voices of the people died away, than he advanced and cried:

"Whom shall we choose, Goths? Reflect well! Above all, it is clear, we
need a man with a young and powerful arm to lead us against the enemy.
But that alone is not sufficient. Why did our ancestors elevate the
Amelungs? Because they were the noblest and most ancient race,
descended from the gods. The first star is extinguished; remember the
second, remember the Balthes!"

"Now there lived only one male descendant of that family, a not yet
adult grandchild of Duke Pitza--for Alaric, the brother of the Dukes
Thulun and Ibba, had not been heard of for years. Arahad was confident
that this boy would not be chosen, and that then the people would think
of the third star of nobility. But he erred. Old Haduswinth came
forward angrily and exclaimed:

"Nobility and race! Are we serfs or freemen? By the Thunderer! shall we
count ancestors when Belidarius is in the land? I will tell thee, boy,
what a king needs. A brave arm, it is true, but not that alone. The
King shall be a rock of justice, a bulwark of peace, not only a leader
in the battle. The King shall have an ever-quiet and ever-clear mind,
as clear as the blue sky; and, like stars, just thoughts shall rise and
set therein. The King shall have an ever-equal power, but still more an
ever-equal measure; he shall never lose and forget himself in love or
hate, as we may, who stand below in the crowd. He shall not only be
mild to friends, but just to enemies. He, in whose heart serenity is
paired with bold courage, and true moderation with true strength--that
man, Arahad, is kingly, even though the humblest peasant had begotten
him."

Loud applause followed the words of the old man, and Arahad fell back
abashed. But Haduswinth continued:

"Good Goths, I think we have such a man! I will not name him: you shall
name him to me. I came here from the distant Alps of our boundary,
towards the Karathans, where the wild Turbidus rushes foaming down the
rocks. There I have lived for more than the usual days of man, free,
proud and lonely. I heard little of the acts of men, even of the great
deeds of my own nation, unless a pack-horse laden with salt happened to
stray my way. And yet the warlike frame of _one_ of our heroes
penetrated even to that desolate height. One who never drew his sword
in an unjust cause, and who never sheathed it without victory. His name
I heard again and again when I asked: Who will protect our kingdom when
Theodoric dies? His name I heard in every victory that we gained, and
in every work of peace that was accomplished. I had never seen him. I
longed to see him. To-day I have both seen and heard him. I have looked
into his eyes, that are clear and mild as the sun. I have heard his
words. I heard how he pleaded for right and justice, even for a hated
enemy. I heard how he alone, when blind passion carried us away,
remained serene and quiet and just. Then I thought in my heart: that
man is kingly; strong in war and just in peace; true as steel and pure
as gold. Goths! that man shall be our king. Name the man!"

"Earl Witichis! yes, Witichis! Hail, King Witichis!"

As the unanimous acclamation rang across the plain, a sudden fear fell
upon the modest man, who had eagerly listened to the speech of the old
orator, and only towards the close suspected that he himself was the
man so praised.

And as he heard his name ring in this thousand-voiced shout, his only
feeling was: "No! this cannot, must not be!"

He tore himself away from Teja and Hildebad, who were joyfully pressing
his hands, and sprang forward, shaking his head, and, as if to protect
himself, stretching forth his arm.

"No!" he cried; "no, friends! not that to me! I am a simple soldier, no
king. I am perhaps a good tool, but no master! Choose another, a
worthier!"

And, as if beseeching them, he held out both hands to the people. But
the thundering cry, "Hail, King Witichis!" was the only answer he
received.

And now old Hildebrand advanced, seized his hand, and said in a loud
voice:

"Cease to resist, Witichis! Who was it who first swore to acknowledge,
without hesitation, the man who gained a majority even of one voice?
See, thou hast all voices; and wilt thou refuse!"


But Witichis shook his head.

Then the old man went up to him and whispered:

"What? Must I urge thee more strongly? Must I remind thee of that
midnight oath and bond; to sacrifice all for the well-being of thy
people? I know--I see through thy transparent soul--that the crown is
more a burthen to thee than an honour. I suspect that this crown will
bring thee great and bitter pain, perhaps more pain than joy; and
therefore I ask of thee, that thou accept it."

Witichis was still silent and pressed both hands over his eyes.

This by-play had lasted far too long for the enthusiasm of the people.
They already prepared the broad shield on which to lift him; they
already pressed up the eminence; and, almost impatiently, the cry
sounded anew, "Hail, King Witichis!"

"Think of thy oath! wilt thou keep it or break it!" whispered
Hildebrand.

"Keep it!" said Witichis, and resolutely looked up. He now, without
false shame or vanity, came forward a step and said: "You have chosen
me, O Goths! well, then take me; I will be your king."

At this each man's sword flashed in the light, and a louder cry arose:
"All hail, King Witichis!"

Old Hildebrand now descended from his place and said:

"I leave this high seat, for the place now belongs to our king. Only
once again let me perform the office of the Ting-Earl. If I cannot hang
the purple on thy shoulders, O King, which the Amelungs have worn; nor
reach to thee their golden sceptre--take, at least, my judge's mantle
and the staff of justice for a sceptre; as a sign that thou wert chosen
for thy justice' sake. I cannot press Theodoric's golden circlet, the
old Gothic crown, upon thy brow, then take the first leaves of the oak
which thou resemblest in trustiness and strength."

With these words he broke a tender shoot of the oak and bound it round
Witichis' brow.

"Up, Gothic warriors! fulfil your office with the shield!"

Haduswinth, Teja, and Hildebad took the ancient Ting-shield, lifted the
King, who was now crowned with wreath, staff, and mantle, and raised
him on their shoulders in sight of all the people.

"Behold, O Goths, your King, whom you yourselves have chosen, and swear
allegiance to him!"

And they swore--standing upright, not kneeling=-to true to him till
death.

Witichis sprang from the shield, ascended the Ting-seat and cried:

"As you swear fidelity to me, so do I to you. I will be a mild and just
king; I will do right and prevent wrong. I will remember that you are
free, like me, and not my slaves. And I dedicate my life, my happiness,
all that is mine, to you, to the people of the good Goths! I swear it
by the God of Heaven, and by my throne."

And taking the Ting-shield from the tree, he cried:

"The Ting is over. I dissolve the Assembly."

The sajones at once knocked down the hazel staffs with the cords, and
in disorderly confusion the masses mingled over the wide plain.

The Romans, who, curiously but shyly, had observed from a distance this
custom of a free people, such as Italy had not witnessed for more than
five hundred years, now also mixed freely with the Gothic soldiers, to
whom they sold wine and meat.

Witichis prepared to go with his friends and the leaders of the army to
one of the tents which were erected on the bank of the river.

There a man in Roman costume--as it seemed, a well-to-do
citizen--pressed among his followers, and asked eagerly for Earl Teja,
the son of Tagila.

"I am he. What would you, Roman?" asked Teja, turning.

"Nought, sir, except to deliver this vase to you. See, the seal, the
scorpion, is intact."

"What shall I do with the vase? I buy no such things."

"The vase is yours, sir. It is full of documents and rolls which belong
to you. My guest desired me to give it to you. I beg you, take it."

And he pressed the vase into Teja's hand, and disappeared amid the
crowd.

Teja broke the seal indifferently, and took the documents out.
Indifferently he looked at them.

But suddenly a vivid flush overspread his pale cheeks, his eyes
flashed, and he convulsively bit his lip. The vase fell to the ground
as he rushed up to Witichis, and said, in an almost toneless voice:

"My King! King Witichis, a favour!"

"What is it, Teja? For God's sake, what wilt thou?"

"Leave of absence! for six--three days! I must go!"

"Go? Where?"

"To revenge myself! Read--the devil who accused my parents, who drove
them to desperation, madness, and death--it is he--whom I long since
suspected. Here is his accusation, addressed to the Bishop of
Florentia, in his own handwriting--it is Theodahad!"

"It is, it is Theodahad," said Witichis, looking up from the letter.
"Go, then! But, doubt it not, thou wilt not find him in Rome. He has
certainly fled long since. He has had a great start. Thou canst not
overtake him!"

"I will overtake him, even if he rides on the wings of the
storm-eagle!"

"Thou wilt not find him!"

"I will find him, if I must pluck him from hell's deepest abyss, or
from out of the midst of the angels!"

"He will have fled with a strong escort," warned Witichis.

"I will reach him in the midst of a thousand demons! Hildebad, thy
horse! Farewell, King of the Goths. I go to fulfil the ban!"





                                BOOK IV.

                               WITICHIS.

"And the Goths chose Witichis for their King, a man of humble origin,
but a famous warrior."--_Procopius: Wars of the Goths_, i. 11.




                                PART I.



                               CHAPTER I.

Slowly sank the sun behind the green hills of Fæsulæ, and gilded the
columns in front of the simple country-house of which Rauthgundis was
the mistress.

The Gothic servants and Italian slaves were busy concluding the day's
work.

The stable-man was fetching the young horses from the pasture; two
other servants were bringing a herd of fine cattle home from the fields
to the stable; while the goatherd, with Roman invectives, was driving
forward his _protégés_, which stopped here and there to nibble the
salty saxifrage which grew upon the broken walls of the road.

Other labourers were housing the agricultural implements in the large
yard, and a Roman freedman, a very learned and superior personage, the
upper gardener himself, left, with a contented look, the place where he
practised his blooming and sweet-scented science.

Our little friend Athalwin, with his crown of bright golden hair, was
just issuing from the stables.

"Don't forget, Kakus," he cried, "to throw a rusty nail into the
water-bucket. Wachis spoke of it particularly. Then he need not beat
thee when he comes home."

And he banged the door to.

"Nothing but trouble with these Italian servants," said the little
master, with an air of importance. "Since father went away, and Wachis
joined him in the camp, everything lies upon my shoulders; for mother
is enough for the maids, but the men need a master."

And the little lad marched with great gravity across the yard.

"And they have no proper respect for me," he continued, pouting his
cherry lips and ruffing his white forehead. "How should they? At the
next equinox I shall be fully nine years old, and they still let me go
about with a thing like a kitchen spoon;" and he pulled contemptuously
at the little wooden sword hanging to his belt.

"They ought to give me a hunting-knife, a real weapon. With this I can
do nothing, and I look like nothing!"

Yet he looked very lovely, like an angry Cupid, in his short sleeveless
coat of the finest white linen, which the loving hand of his mother had
spun, sewed, and embroidered with an ornamental red stripe.

"I should like very much to run into the fields and get the wild
flowers for mother which she loves so much, far more than our finest
garden flowers; but I must look round before they shut the doors, for,
'Athalwin,' said father, as he left us, 'take good care of the place,
and protect thy mother. I rely upon thee;' and I shook hands upon it,
so I must keep my word."

So saying, he went across the yard, past the front of the
dwelling-house, looked into all the offices on the left, and was just
about to turn to the back of the square court, when he was attracted by
the loud barking of some young dogs at a noise which was heard behind
the wooden fence which enclosed the whole.

He went towards the corner, and started back in surprise; for on the
fence sat, or rather climbed, a strange figure.

It was a tall, haggard old man in a coarse doublet of rough cloth, such
as was worn by mountain shepherds; instead of a mantle, an immense
undressed wolfskin hung over his shoulders, and in his right hand he
carried a long staff with a steel point, with which he warded off the
dogs, who angrily sprang at the fence.

The boy ran up.

"Stop, thou strange man! What art thou doing at my fence? Wilt get down
at once!"

The old man started, and looked keenly at the handsome boy.

"Down, I say!" repeated the lad.

"Is this the way one greets a tired wanderer at this house!" asked the
intruder.

"Yes, when the tired wanderer climbs over the back fence. Art thou
honest and meanest honestly--in front stands the great yard-gate wide
open; come in there!"

"I know that very well."

And the man prepared to climb down into the courtyard.

"Stop!" cried the boy angrily; "thou shalt not come down there. At him,
Gruffo! At him, Wulfo! And if thou art not afraid of the two young
ones, I will call the old one! Then take care! Hey! Thursa! Thursa!
stop him!"

At this cry an immense bristly grey wolf-hound darted round the corner
of the stable with a furious bark, and was about to spring at the
intruder's throat. But she had scarcely reached the fence, when her
rage was suddenly changed into joy; she ceased to bark, and, wagging
her tail, sprang up to the old man, who now climbed leisurely down.

"Yes, yes, Thursa, faithful bitch, we remember each other," he said.
"Now tell me, little man, what is thy name?"

"I am called Athalwin," answered the boy, retreating shyly; "but
thou--I believe thou hast bewitched the dog--what art thou called?"

"Like thee," said the old man, in a more friendly manner; "I am glad
thou hast my name. But be quiet; I am no robber! Lead me to thy mother,
that I may tell her how bravely thou hast defended thy home."

And so the two adversaries walked peacefully into the house, Thursa
leaping on in front with joyful barks.

The Gothic housewife had changed, with slight alteration, the
Corinthian atrium of this Roman villa, with its rows of pillars on four
sides, into the hall of the Germanic dwelling.

In the absence of her husband it was not wanted for gay hospitality,
and Rauthgundis had brought her maids here from the women's room, to
enjoy the larger space and fresher air.

There sat a long row of Gothic maidens with their noisy spindles;
opposite to them a few Roman women slaves, occupied in finer work.

In the middle of the hall walked Rauthgundis, and let her own
swiftly-turning spindle dance upon the smooth mosaic pavement, at the
same time turning frequently to look at the maids.

Her dark-blue dress of home manufacture was gathered up above one knee,
and puffed out over a belt of steel rings, which, her only ornament,
bore a bunch of keys.

Her auburn hair was combed, back from the brow and temples, and twined
into a simple knot at the back of the head.

There was much simple dignity in her aspect as she paced the room with
grave and examining looks. She went up to one of the youngest of the
maids, who sat lowest in the row, and bent over her.

"Well done, Liuta," she said; "thy thread is smooth, and thou hast not
so often looked up at the door to-day. Certainly," she added with a
smile, "there is not much merit in that, as Wachis cannot enter."

The young girl blushed.

Rauthgundis laid her hand kindly upon her smooth hair.

"I know," she said, "that thou art angry with me in secret, because I
made thee, the betrothed, work all this year an hour longer, morning
and evening, than the other maids. It was cruel, was it not? Well, see!
it was for thine own good. All that thou hast spun this year of my best
flax is thine; I give it thee for thy new household. Then thou wilt not
need to spin next year, the first of thy married life."

The girl took her hand, and looked up gratefully, with tearful eyes.

"And _you_ they call hard and severe!" was all that she could say.

"Mild with the good, severe with the bad, Liuta. All that is under my
care is the property of my husband, and the inheritance of my boy.
Therefore I must be strict."


Just then the old man and Athalwin appeared at the door. The boy wanted
to call out, but the old man held his hand over his mouth, and, for a
while, observed unremarked the actions of Rauthgundis as she examined
the maids' work, praised, scolded, and arranged new tasks.

"Yes," at last said the old man to himself, "she looks very stately,
and seems to be mistress in the house--yet, who knows all!"

And now it was no more possible to hold Athalwin back.

"Mother!" he cried, "a strange man! who has bewitched Thursa, and
climbed over the fence, and wants to come to thee! I cannot understand
it!"

The stately woman turned to the door with dignity, holding her hand
over her eyes, to shade them from the dazzling evening sun, which shone
full into the doorway.

"Why dost thou lead the guest here? Thou knowest that thy father is not
at home. Take him into the men's hall; his place is not here with me."

"But it is, Rauthgundis! Here, with thee, is my place!" cried the old
man, coming forward.

"Father!" cried Rauthgundis, and threw herself into the stranger's
arms.

Puzzled, and not without displeasure, Athalwin looked on at this
meeting.

"So thou art grandfather, who lives up in the northern mountains? God
be with thee, grandfather! But why didst thou not tell me at once? And
why didst thou not come through the gate, like other honest folk?"

The old man held his daughter by both hands, and looked inquiringly
into her eyes.

"She looks happy and blooming," he murmured to himself.

Rauthgundis composed herself. She cast a quick look round the hall.

All the spindles had ceased whirling--except Liuta's--all eyes were
curiously fixed upon the old man.

"Will you spin directly, curious girls!" cried Rauthgundis reprovingly.
"Thou, Marcia, hast let the flax fell with thy staring; thou knowest
the custom--thou wilt spin another spoolful. You others can leave your
work. Come, father! Liuta, prepare a tepid bath, and meat and wine----"

"No," said the old man; "the old peasant in the mountains has only the
waterfall for bath and drink. And as to eating--outside the fence, near
the boundary-stone, lies my knapsack; fetch it for me. There I have my
wheaten bread and my sheep's-milk cheese.--What cattle hast thou in the
stall, and horses in the pasture?"

It was his first question.

An hour after--it was already dark, and little Athalwin had gone to
bed, shaking his head over his grandfather--father and daughter
wandered into the open air in the light of the rising moon.

"I have not air enough inside," the old man had said.

They spoke much and earnestly as they walked up and down the court-yard
and garden. Between whiles, the old man put questions about the
household, such as were suggested by the implements or buildings near
him; and in his tone lay no tenderness; only sometimes he secretly
examined the countenance of his child with a loving look.

"Do cease talking about rye and horses," at last said Rauthgundis, "and
tell me how it has gone with thee these long years? And what has at
last brought thee down from the mountains to thy children?"

"How has it gone with me? pretty lonely! lonely! and cold winters! Yes,
it is not so pleasant and warm up there as here in the Italian valley."

He spoke as if in reproach.

"Why did I come down? Well, last year the breeding-bull fell down from
the _Firn-joch_, and so I wanted to buy another here."

Rauthgundis could no longer contain herself; she affectionately
embraced the old man and cried:

"And no bull was to be found nearer than here? Do not lie, father, to
thine own heart and to thine own child. Thou art come because thou
couldst not help it, because thou couldst no more endure thy longing
for thy child!"

The old man stroked her hair.

"How dost thou know that? Well, yes, I wanted to see how it went with
thee, and how _he_ keeps thee--the Gothic Earl!"

"Like the apple of his eye!" cried Rauthgundis joyfully.

"Indeed? Why, then, is he not at home with wife and child in his house
and farm?"

"He serves in the King's army."

"Yes, that is just it! What has he to do with service and a king? But,
tell me, why dost not wear a golden bracelet? A Gothic woman once came
our way from the Italian valleys, five years ago; she had gold a hand
broad. Then I thought, such thy daughter wears. And I was pleased, and
now----"

Rauthgundis smiled.

"Shall I wear gold to please my maids? I only put on ornaments when
Witichis sees me."

"Indeed! May he deserve it! But thou _hast_ golden brooches and rings,
like other Gothic wives down here?"

"More than others--chests full. Witichis brought a great booty from the
wars."

"So thou art quite happy?"

"Quite, father, but not because of the gold bracelets."

"Hast thou nothing to complain of? Only tell me, child! Whatever it may
be, tell it to thy old father, and he will see thee righted."

Rauthgundis stopped short in her walk.

"Father, speak not thus! Thou art wrong to speak so, nor is it right
for me to listen. Cast it off, this unhappy delusion, as if I must
necessarily be unhappy because I came into the valley. I verily believe
this fear alone has brought thee down."

"That alone!" cried the old man, striking his staff upon the ground.
"And thou callest thy father's deepest conviction a delusion! Last
night I saw thee and Witichis in a dream. He banqueted in a gilded
hall, among proud men and lovely women, richly clothed; but thou wert
standing outside the door in a beggar's dress, and wept bitter tears
and called to him. But he said, 'Who is this woman? I know her not!'
And I could no longer rest upon the mountains. Something drew me down;
I felt obliged to come and see if my child was well cared for in the
valley; and I wished to surprise him, therefore I would not enter thy
house by the gate."

"Father," said Rauthgundis angrily, "one should not think such things,
even in a dream. Thy mistrust----"

"Mistrust? I trust no one but myself, and the dream told me distinctly
that a misfortune threatens thee! Avoid it! Take thy boy and go back
with me; only for a short time. Believe me, thon wilt quickly love
again the free air up there, where one can overlook all the land."

"I leave my husband? Never!"

"Has he not left thee? The court, and the service of kings, is more to
him than wife and child! Then let him have his will."

"Father," said Rauthgundis, grasping his hand, "not a word more. Didst
thou, then, not love my mother, that thou canst speak so to a wedded
wife? My Witichis is all in all to me; the air and light of life. And
he loves me with all his faithful heart; we are one. And if he thinks
it right to work and act apart from me, then it _is_ right. He serves
the cause of his people, and between me and him there shall not be a
word, not a shadow, not even a father!"

The old man was silent, but his doubts were not removed.

"Why," he re-commenced after a pause, "why does he not take thee with
him, if he has such important affairs at court? Is he ashamed of the
peasant's daughter?" and he struck his staff angrily on the ground.

"Anger blinds thee! Thou art vexed because he has taken me away from
the mountain into the Italian valley, and art equally vexed because he
does not take me to Rome, amongst the Italians!"

"And thou shalt not go there! But he ought to wish it; he ought not to
be able to live without thee. But the King's general is no doubt
ashamed of the peasant's child."

Just then, before Rauthgundis could answer, a horseman galloped up to
the closed gate, before which they happened to be standing.

"Up! open!" he cried, striking the gate-post with his war-club.

"Who is there!" asked the old man cautiously.

"Open! A king's messenger should not be kept waiting so!"

"It is Wachis!" exclaimed Rauthgundis, pushing back the heavy bolt.
"What brings thee back so unexpectedly!"


"It is you who open to me!" cried the faithful man. "Oh, hail! all
hail, Queen of the Goths! Your lord is chosen King. With my own eyes I
saw him lifted upon the shield! He greets you, and calls you and
Athalwin to Rome. In three days you must depart."

In the midst of all her fright and surprise and joy and questioning,
Rauthgundis could not help casting a joyful and proud look at her
father. Then she threw herself upon his neck and wept.

"Well, father," she asked, when she had again composed herself, "what
sayest thou now?"

"What do I say? The misfortune that I foresaw has come! Even to-night
will I return to my mountains!"



                              CHAPTER II.

While the Goths were assembling at Regeta, the powerful army of
Belisarius had invested the hard-pressed city of Neapolis in a wide
semicircle.

Rapid and irresistible as a fire in dry heather, the army of the
Byzantines had advanced from the southernmost point of Italy to the
walls of the Parthenopeian town, meeting with no resistance, for,
thanks to Theodahad's man[oe]uvres, not a thousand Goths were to be
found in all these parts. The short skirmish at the Pass of Jugum was
the only hindrance with which the Greeks had met.

The Roman inhabitants of Bruttia, with its towns, Regium, Vibo and
Squillacium, Tempsa and Croton, Ruscia and Thurii; of Calabria, with
Gallipolis, Tarentum, and Brundusium; of Lucania, with Velia and
Buxentum; of Apulia, with Acheruntia and Canusium, Salernum, Nuceria,
and Campsæ, and many other towns, had received Belisarius with joy,
when, in the name of the Emperor, he promised them deliverance from the
yoke of the heretics and barbarians.

To the Aufidus on the east and the Sarnus on the south-west, Italy was
wrested from the Goths; and the walls of Neapolis was the first
obstacle which broke the rush of the inimical flood which was
threatening to overwhelm all Italy.

The camp of Belisarius was worthy of the name of a splendid spectacle.
In the north, before the Porta Nolana, stood the camp of the "bloody"
Johannes. To his care was entrusted the Via Nolana, and the task of
forcing the way to Rome. There, on the wide levels, in the corn-fields
of the industrious Goths, the Massagetæ and the yellow-skinned Huns
exercised their small rough horses.

Near them were encamped the light-foot of the Persian mercenaries,
dressed in linen coats, and armed with bows and arrows; heavy Armenian
shield-bearers; Macedonians with lances ten feet long, called sarrissi;
and large troops of Thessalian, Thracian and Saracen horsemen, who,
condemned to a hated inactivity during the siege, did their best to
occupy their leisure time by inroads into the neighbouring country.

The camp in the centre, exactly on the east of the city, was occupied
by the main army; Belisarius's large tent of blue Sidonian silk,
with its purple standard, towered in the middle. Here strutted the
body-guard which Belisarius himself had armed and paid, and which only
those who had distinguished themselves by valiant deeds were allowed to
join, gay in richly-gilded breast-plates and greaves, bronze shields,
broad-swords, and halberd-like lances. These men were frequently
promoted to the highest rank.

The kernel of the foot-soldiers was formed by eight thousand Illyrians,
the only worthy troop sent by Greece itself; and here, too, were
encamped, under the command of their native chiefs, the Avari,
Bulgarians, Sarmatians, and even Germans, as well as Herulians and
Gepidæ, whom Belisarius was obliged to enlist at a heavy price, in
order to cover the want of native soldiery. Here, too, were the Italian
emigrants and many deserters.

Finally, the south-western camp, which stretched along the coast, was
commanded by Martinus, who superintended the service of the implements
of siege. Here stood, stored up, the catapults and balistæ, the rams
and slings; here mingled Isaurian allies and the contingents sent by
newly-recovered Africa; Moorish and Numidian horsemen and Libyan
slingers. And almost all the barbaric races of three-quarters of the
globe had here their representatives; Bajuvars from the Donau, Alemanni
from the Rhine, Franks from the Maas, Burgundians from the Rhone, Antæ
from the Dniester, Lazians from the Phasis, and the Abasgi, Siberians,
Lebanthians and Lycaonians from Asia and Africa, all well skilled in
archery.

Out of such heterogeneous materials was the army composed, with which
Justinian hoped to drive away the Gothic barbarians and liberate Italy.

The command of the outposts, always and everywhere, was entrusted to
the body-guard; and the chain of stations extended round the city from
the Porta Capuana almost to the waves of the sea.

Neapolis was badly fortified and weakly garrisoned. Less than a
thousand Goths were there to defend the extensive ramparts against an
army of forty thousand Byzantines and Italians.

Earl Uliaris, the commander of the city, was a brave man, and had sworn
by his beard not to deliver up the fortress. But even he would not have
been long able to withstand the far superior force and generalship of
Belisarius, had not a fortunate circumstance come to his assistance.
This was the premature return of the Grecian fleet to Byzantium. When,
namely, Belisarius, after having rested his troops and re-ordered his
army in Regium, had given the command for a general advance of the land
and sea forces to Neapolis, his navarchus Konon had showed him an order
from the Emperor, till then kept secret, according to which the fleet
was to sail, immediately after landing the troops, to Nicopolis on the
Grecian coast, under the pretext of fetching reinforcements, but in
reality to fetch Prince Germanus, the nephew of Justinian, with his
imperial lancers, to Italy, where he was to observe, control, and, in
case of need, check the victorious steps of Belisarius, and, as
commander-in-chief, to protect the interests of the suspicious Emperor.

With deep vexation Belisarius saw his fleet set sail just at the moment
when he needed it most, and he only succeeded, after much urgency, in
gaining the promise of the navarchus to send him four war-triremes,
which were still cruising off Sicily. So Belisarius, when he prepared
to besiege Neapolis, was, indeed, able to enclose the city to the
north-east, east, and north-west with his land forces--the western road
to Rome, defended by the castellum Tiberii, was successfully kept by
Earl Uliaris--but he was not able to blockade the harbour nor prevent
free communication by sea.

At first he comforted himself with the fact that the besieged likewise
had no fleet, and could therefore derive little benefit from this
freedom of movement; but now he was, for the first time, baffled by the
talent and temerity of an adversary whom he afterwards learned to fear.

This was Totila, who had scarcely reached Neapolis after the fight at
the pass, had scarcely aided Julius in showing the last honours to the
remains of Valerius, and in drying Valeria's first tears, than he
began, with restless activity, to create a fleet out of nothing. He was
commodore of the squadron at Neapolis, but King Theodahad, as we know,
had, in spite of his remonstrances, ordered the whole fleet out of the
way of Belisarius to Pisa, where it was appointed to guard the mouth of
the Arnus. So, from the very beginning, Totila had nothing under his
command but three small guard-ships, two of which he had later lost off
Sicily; and he had returned to Neapolis despairing of every possibility
of defending the city towards the sea. But when he heard the incredible
news of the return home of the Byzantine fleet his hopes revived, and
he did not rest until he had--out of fishing-boats, merchant-craft,
harbour-boats, and the hastily-repaired disabled ships on the
wharves--formed a little fleet of about twelve sail, which could
neither defy a storm at sea nor cope with a single man-of-war, but
could still do good service, such as to provide Baiæ, Cumæ and other
towns to the north-west, which would otherwise have been completely cut
off, with victuals; to observe the movements of the enemy on the coast,
and plague them with repeated attacks; in which Totila himself often
landed in the south at the rear of the Grecian camp, surprised--now
here, now there--some troop of the enemy, and spread such insecurity,
that the Byzantines at last only ventured to leave the camp in strong
detachments, and never dared to stray far, while Totila's success gave
fresh courage to the hard-pressed garrison of Neapolis, who were
wearied by incessant watching and frequent combats.

Notwithstanding this partial success, Totila could not hide from
himself that his position was very grave and that as soon as a few
Grecian ships should appear before the city it would be desperate.

He therefore used a portion of his boats to convoy a number of the
unarmed inhabitants of Neapolis to Baiæ and Cumæ, angrily repelling the
demand of the rich, that this means of safety should be granted only to
those who paid for it; and taking rich and poor, without distinction,
into his saving vessels.

In vain had Totila repeatedly and earnestly begged Valeria to fly in
one of these ships, under the protection of Julius; she would not yet
leave the tomb of her father; she would not part from her lover, whose
praise as protector of the city she was only too much delighted to hear
proclaimed by all voices.

So she continued to reside in her old home in the city, indulging in
her sorrow and in her love.



                              CHAPTER III.

It was at this time that Miriam experienced the greatest joy and the
keenest sorrow that she had ever known.

She could sun herself more frequently than ever in the presence of the
man she loved, for the Porta Capuana was an important point of the
fortifications, and Totila was obliged to visit it often. He daily held
conferences with Earl Uliaris in old Isaac's tower.

At such times Miriam, when she had greeted the guests, and served the
simple meal of fruit and wine, used to slip into the narrow little
garden which lay close under the walls of the tower.

This place had been, originally, a small court belonging to an ancient
Temple of Minerva, the "wall-protectress," to whom altars had been
gratefully erected at the principal gates of various towns.

The altar had disappeared centuries ago, but the gigantic olive-tree,
which had once shaded the statue dedicated to the goddess, still
stretched its boughs aloft, while flowers, cherished by Miriam's loving
hand, and which she had often plucked for the bride of the man whom she
hopelessly loved, filled the air with perfume.

Exactly opposite the tree, whose knotted roots protruded from the
earth, disclosing a dark opening in the ground-floor of the old temple,
there had been placed a large black cross, and below it a little
praying stool, which was made out of one of the marble steps of the
temple.

The Christians loved to subject the remains of the ancient worship to
the service of the new, and to drive out the old gods, now become
demons, by the symbols of their victorious faith.

The beautiful Jewess often sat for hours under this cross with old
Arria, the half-blind widow of the under doorkeeper, who, after the
early death of Isaac's wife, had, with motherly love, watched little
Miriam bloom together with her flowers amid the desolate ruins of the
old walls.

Twice a day did Uliaris and Totila thus meet; reporting their losses or
successes and examining the probability of saving the city.

But on the tenth day of the siege, before dawn, Uliaris hastened on
board Totila's "admiral" ship, a rotten fishing-boat, and found the
commander sleeping on deck, covered by a ragged sail.

"What is it!" cried Totila, starting up and still dreaming; "the enemy?
where?"

"No, my boy; this time it is again Uliaris, and not Belisarius, who
awakens thee. But, by the Thunderer! this cannot last much longer!"

"Uliaris, thou bleedest! thy head is bandaged!"

"Bah! 'twas but a stray arrow! Fortunately no poisoned one. I got it
last night. Thou must know that things are at a bad pass; much worse
than ever before. The bloody Johannes--may God slay him!--digs under
our Castle Tiberius like a badger, and if he gets _that_--then
farewell, Neapolis! Yester even he finished a battery upon the hill
above us, and now he throws burning arrows upon our heads. I tried last
night to drive him out of his works, but it was no use. They were seven
to one against us, and I gained nothing by it but this wound on my grey
head."


"The battery must come down," said Totila reflectively.

"The devil it must! but it will not! I have still more to tell. The
citizens begin to get unruly. Belisarius daily shoots a hundred blunt
arrows into the city, to which is tied the inscription: 'Rebel for
freedom!' They have more effect than a thousand pointed darts. Already,
here and there, stones are cast from the roofs upon my poor fellows. If
this goes on--we cannot, with a thousand men, keep off forty thousand
Greeks outside and thirty thousand Neapolitans inside. Therefore I
think--" and his eyes looked very gloomy.

"What thinkest thou?"

"We will burn down a portion of the city--at least the suburbs----"

"So that the inhabitants may like us all the better? No, Uliaris, they
shall not have cause to call us 'barbarians.' I know of better
means--they are starving; yesterday I brought in four shiploads of oil,
com, and wine; this I will divide amongst them."

"Oil and corn if thou wilt! But not the wine! That I claim for my
Goths. They have drunk cistern-water long enough, the nasty stuff!"

"Good, thirsty hero, you shall have the wine for yourselves."

"Well? and still no news from Ravenna, or from Rome?"

"None! Yesterday I sent off my fifth messenger."

"May God destroy our King! Listen, Totila, I don't believe we shall
ever get alive out of these worm-eaten walls."

"Nor I either," said Totila quietly, and offered his guest a cup of
wine.

Uliaris looked at him; then he drank and said:

"Dear fellow! thou art pure as gold, and thy Cæcubian too. And if I
must die here, like an old bear amongst the dogs--I am at least glad
that I have learned to know thee so well; thee and thy Cæcubian."

With this rough but friendly speech the grey old Goth left the ship.

Totila sent corn and wine to the garrison in the castle, with which the
soldiers regaled themselves far into the night.

But the next morning, when Uliaris looked forth from the tower of the
castle, he rubbed his eyes. For on the battery upon the hill waved the
blue flag of the Goths.

Totila had landed in the night in the rear of the enemy, and had taken
the works by storm.

But this new act of audacity only increased the anger of Belisarius. He
swore to make an end of the troublesome boats at any price. To his
great joy the four triremes from Sicily just then appeared in the
offing. Belisarius ordered that they should at once force their way
into the harbour of Neapolis, and spoil the handiwork of "those
pirates." On the evening of the same day the four immense ships cast
anchor at the entrance of the harbour. Belisarius himself visited the
coast with his followers, and rejoiced at the sight of the sails,
gilded by the evening sun.

"The rising sun shall see them inside the harbour, in spite of that
bold youth," he said to Antonina, who accompanied him, and turned his
dappled-greys back to the camp.

The next morning he had not yet left his camp-bed--Procopius was
standing near him, reading the sketch of a report to Justinian--when
Chanaranzes, the Persian, the leader of the body-guard, entered the
tent, and cried: "The ships, general! the ships are taken!"

Belisarius sprang from his couch in a rage.

"He dies who says it!"

"It would be better," observed Procopius, "that he should die who did
it!"

"Who was it?"

"Oh, sir, the young Goth with the sparkling eyes and shining hair!"

"Totila!" exclaimed Belisarius, "Totila, again!"

"The crew were lying, partly on shore with my outposts, partly on deck,
sound asleep. Suddenly, at midnight, all around became as lively as if
a hundred ships had risen out of the sea."

"A hundred ships! Ten nutshells!"

"In a moment, long before we could come to their help from the shore,
the ships were boarded, the crews taken prisoners, one of the triremes,
whose cable could not be cut quickly enough, set on fire, and the
others towed off to Neapolis!"

"Your ships have entered the harbour sooner than you expected, O
Belisarius," observed Procopius.

But Belisarius had recovered his self-control.

"Now that the bold boy has ships of war, he will become unbearable!
There must be an end to this."

He pressed his helmet upon his majestic head.

"I would willingly have spared the city and the Roman inhabitants; but
I can wait no longer. Procopius, go and summon the generals; Magnus,
Demetrius and Constantinus, Bessas and Ennes, and Martinus, the master
of artillery; I will give them enough to do. The barbarians shall not
rejoice in their victory; they shall learn to know Belisarius."

Shortly there appeared in the tent of the commander a man who, in spite
of the breast-plate which he wore, had more the air of a scholar than
of a warrior.

Martinus, the great mathematician, was of a gentle, peaceful nature,
which had long found its sole happiness in the quiet study of Euclid.
He could not bear to see blood flow, and was even sorry to pluck a
flower. But his mathematical and mechanical studies had one day
accidentally led him to invent a new projectile of fearful power. He
showed the plan to Belisarius, and he, delighted, would not let him
alone, but dragged him before the Emperor, and obliged him to become
"master of artillery to the _magister militum_, for the East"--namely,
the assistant of Belisarius himself. He received a splendid salary, and
was obliged by contract to invent one new machine of war yearly.

Then the gentle mathematician, with many sighs, invented those terrible
tools of destruction which overthrew the walls of fortresses, shattered
the gates of castles, hurled inextinguishable fire into the towns of
Justinian's enemies, and destroyed human lives by thousands.

Every year Martinus delighted in the mathematical problems which he set
himself to do; but as soon as the riddle was solved and the work
completed, he thought with horror of the effects of his inventions.
Therefore he now appeared before Belisarius with a sorrowful
countenance.

"Martinus! circle-turner!" cried Belisarius as he entered, "now show
your art! How many catapults, balistæ, and sling-machines have we in
all?"

"Three hundred and fifty, general."

"'Tis well! Divide them along our whole line of siege. In the north,
before the Porta Capuana and the castle, set the rams against the
walls; down they must come, were they made of diamonds! From the
central camp direct the projectiles in a curve, so that they may fall
into the streets of the city. Make every effort; do not cease a moment
for twenty-four hours; let the troops relieve each other; let all the
machines play!"

"All, general?" asked Martinus. "The new ones too? The pyrobalistæ, the
hot projectiles?"

"Those too; those most of all!"

"General, they are horrible! You do not yet know their effect."

"Well, I shall now see what it is, and put them to the proof."

"Upon this splendid city? On the Emperor's city? Will you win for
Justinian a heap of ashes?"

Belisarius had a great and noble soul. He was angry with himself, with
Martinus, and with the Goths.

"Can I do otherwise?" he asked impatiently. "These stiff-necked Goths,
this foolhardy Totila, force me to it. Five times have I offered
capitulation. It is madness! Not three thousand men stand behind these
walls! By the head of Justinian! why do not the fifty thousand
Neapolitans rise and disarm the barbarians?"

"No doubt they fear your Huns more than their Goths," observed
Procopius.

"They are bad patriots! Forward, Martinus! In an hour Neapolis must
burn!"

"In a shorter time," sighed the mathematician, "if it must be so. I
have brought with me a man who is well-informed; who can help us much,
and simplify the work. He is a living plan of the city. May I bring him
in?"

Belisarius nodded, and the sentry called in a little Jewish-looking
man.

"Ah! Jochem, the architect!" said Belisarius. "I knew you at Byzantium.
You were to rebuild the church of St. Sophia. What became of that
project?"

"By your leave, general, nothing."

"Why not?"

"My plan only amounted to a million centenaria of gold; that was too
little for his Imperial Majesty. For the more a Christian church costs,
the more holy and pleasing to God. A Christian asked double the amount,
and got the order."


"But still I saw you building in Byzantium?"

"Yes, general, my plan pleased the Emperor. I changed it a little, took
out the altar-place, and afterwards built from it a riding-school."

"You know Neapolis thoroughly--outside and inside?"

"Outside and inside--as well as my moneybag."

"'Tis well. You will direct the machines for the strategist against the
walls and into the city. The houses of the friends of the Goths must
come down first. Forward! Mind and do your business well, or else you
will be impaled! Away!"

"The poor city!" sighed Martinus. "But you will see, Jochem, how exact
are the pyrobalistæ; and they work so easily, a child could manage
them. And they act so splendidly!"

And now in all the camp began a monstrous and danger-pregnant activity.

The Gothic sentinels upon the ramparts saw how the heavy machines,
drawn by twenty to thirty horses, camels, asses, or oxen, were brought
before the walls, and divided along the whole line.

Totila and Uliaris went anxiously to the walls and tried to meet this
new danger with effectual means of defence.

Sacks filled with earth were let down before the places threatened by
the rams; firebrands were laid ready to set the machines on fire as
they approached; boiling water, arrows, and stones were to be directed
against the teams and drivers; and already the Goths laughed at the
cowardly enemy when they noticed that the machines halted far out of
the usual range of shot, and completely out of the reach of the
besieged.

But Totila did not laugh.

He was alarmed to see the Byzantines quietly unharness the teams and
arrange their machines. Not a projectile had yet been hurled.

"Well," mocked young Agila, who stood near Totila, "do they mean to
shoot at us from _that_ distance? They had better do it at once from
Byzantium, across the sea! That would be still safer!"

He had not ceased to speak, when a forty-pound stone knocked him, and a
portion of the rampart upon which he stood, to pieces.

Martinus had increased the range threefold.

Totila saw that they were completely without defence against these
terrible projectiles.

The Goths sprang horrified from the walls, and sought shelter in the
streets, houses, and churches. In vain! Thousands and thousands of
arrows, spears, heavy beams, and stones hurtled and hissed in
infallible curves upon their heads; whole blocks of rock came flying
through the air, and fell crashing through the woodwork and slabs of
the strongest roofs; while in the north the rams thundered unceasingly
against the castle with ponderous strokes.

While the thick hail of projectiles literally darkened the air, the
noise of breaking beams, the rattling fall of stones, the shattering of
the ramparts, and the cries of the wounded deafened the ear.

The trembling inhabitants fled terrified into the cellars and vaults of
their houses, cursing both Belisarius and the Goths.

But the horrified city had not yet experienced the worst.

In the market-place, the Forum of Trajan, near the harbour, stood an
uncovered building, a sort of ship's arsenal, heaped up with old,
well-dried timber, tow, flax, tar, and other combustible materials.
Into this building came, hissing and steaming, a strange projectile,
and immediately a flame shot high into the air, and, fed by the
inflammable materials, spread with the speed of the wind.

The besiegers outside greeted the pillars of smoke which now arose with
cries of exultation, and directed arrows and darts upon the place, to
prevent the inhabitants from extinguishing the fire.

Belisarius rode up to Martinus.

"Capital, man of the circle!" he cried. "Capital! Who aimed the shot?"

"I," said Jochem. "Oh! you will be satisfied with me, general. Now, pay
attention. Do you see that large house with the statues upon the flat
roof, to the right of the fire? That is the house of the Valerians, the
greatest enemies of the people of Edom. Attention! It shall burn."

The fiery projectile flew hissing through the air, and immediately a
second flame rose out of the city.

Just then Procopius galloped up and cried:

"Belisarius, your general, Johannes, greets you. The Castle of Tiberius
burns, and the first wall is down!"

And such was the fact; and soon, in all parts of the city, four, six,
ten houses were in flames.

"Water!" cried Totila, galloping through a burning street near the
harbour. "Come out, you citizens of Neapolis! Extinguish your houses! I
can spare no Goths from the walls. Get barrels of water from the
harbour into all the streets! The women into the houses!--What do you
want, girl? leave me.--Is it you, Miriam? You here--among the flames
and arrows? Away! whom do you seek?"

"You," said the girl. "Do not be alarmed. Her house burns, but she is
saved."

"Valeria! For God's sake, where is she?"

"With me. In our strong tower--there she is safe. I saw the flames. I
hastened to the house. Your friend with the soft voice was carrying her
out of the ruins; he wanted to take her into the church. I called to
him, and persuaded him to bring her to the tower. She bleeds. A stone
wounded her upon the shoulder, but there is no danger. She wishes to
see you, and I came to seek you!"

"Thanks, child! But come, come away;" and he took hold of her arm, and
swung her up to his saddle.

Trembling, she wound both arms about his neck. He held his broad shield
over her head with his left hand, and galloped off with her through the
smoking streets to the Porta Capuana.

"Oh! would that I might die now," murmured Miriam to herself; "now,
upon his breast, if not with him!"

In the tower Totila found Valeria, stretched upon Miriam's bed, under
the care of Julius and her female slaves. She was pale and weak from
loss of blood, but composed and quiet.

Totila flew to her side. Miriam stood at the window with a beating
heart, and looked silently at the burning city.

Totila had scarcely convinced himself that the wound was very slight,
than he again sprang up and cried:

"You must go! Immediately! This very moment! In another hour Belisarius
may storm the city. I have once more filled my ships with fugitives.
They will take you to Cajeta, and thence to Rome. Afterwards you must
hasten to Taginæ to your estate. Julius will accompany you."

"Yes," said Julius, "for we go the same way."

"The same way? Whither art thou bound?"

"To Gaul, to my home. I cannot bear to see this terrible struggle
any longer. You know well that all Italy has risen against you. My
fellow-countrymen fight under Belisarius. Shall I raise my hand against
them, or against you? I will go."

Totila turned silently to Valeria.

"My friend," she said, "it seems to me that our star has set for ever!
Scarcely has my father gone to lay your oath at the throne of God, than
Neapolis, the third city of the realm, falls."

"So you have no faith in our swords?"

"I have faith in your swords, but not in your good fortune! With the
falling rafters of my father's house fall all my hopes. Farewell, for a
long, long time! I obey you; I will go to Taginæ."

Totila and Julius now went out with the slaves to secure places in one
of the triremes.

Valeria rose from the bed; Miriam hurried to her to fasten the shining
sandals upon her feet.

"Let it alone, maiden; you must not serve me!" said Valeria.

"I do it gladly," whispered Miriam; "but permit me a question." Her
sparkling eyes were fixed upon Valeria's composed features. "You are
beautiful and clever and proud--but tell me, do you love him? You are
able to leave him at such a moment. Do you love him with devouring,
irresistible ardour? do you love him with such a love as----"

"As yours?" Valeria pressed the lovely girl's glowing face to her
bosom, as if in protection. "No, my sweet sister! Do not be startled. I
guessed it long ago from his accounts of you. And I saw it at once in
your first look at him to-day. Do not be anxious; your secret is safe
with me. No one shall learn it. Do not weep, do not tremble, you sweet
child. I love you the better for the sake of your love. I quite
understand it. He is happy who, like you, can indulge his feelings at
such a moment. But an inimical God has bestowed upon me a mind that
ever looks forward, and so I see before us unknown pain and a long dark
path which ends not in light. But I cannot allow you to think your love
the more noble because it is hopeless. My hopes, too, are ashes!
Perhaps it would have been happier for him had he discovered the
scented rose of your love--for Valeria, I fear, will never be his! But
farewell, Miriam. They come. Remember our meeting! Remember me as a
sister, and take my warmest thanks. Thanks for your faithful love!"

Miriam had trembled like a child found out in a fault, and would have
gladly run out of Valeria's sight, who seemed to see through
everything. But these noble sentiments overcame her timidity, and tears
flowed plentifully over her glowing cheeks. Trembling with shame and
weeping, she leaned her head upon her new friend's breast. They heard
Julius coming to call Valeria. They were obliged to part.

Miriam cast a rapid glance at the face of the Roman lady; and then she
threw herself on the ground before her, embraced her knees, pressed a
burning kiss upon her cold hand, and disappeared into the next room.

Valeria rose as if from a dream, and looked about her. In a vase on the
window-sill stood a dark-red rose. Valeria kissed it, and put it into
the bosom of her dress, blessed, with the motion of her hand, the place
which had afforded her an asylum, and then followed Julius, who took
her in a closed litter to the harbour, where she had time to take a
short leave of Totila, before she went on board with Julius. Shortly
afterwards the ship set sail, and moved proudly out of the harbour.

Totila looked after it. He saw Valeria's white hand signing a farewell.
He looked and looked at the lessening sail, little heeding the
projectiles which now began to fall thicker into the harbour. He leaned
against a pillar, and, for a moment, forgot the burning town and
everything around him.

Thorismuth roused him from his reverie.

"Come, commodore!" he cried. "I have been seeking thee everywhere.
Uliaris wishes to speak to thee.--Come, why dost thou stand here,
gazing at the sea among all these whizzing arrows?"

Totila slowly raised himself.

"Seest thou," he said, "seest thou yonder ship? There they leave
me----"

"Who?" asked Thorismuth.

"My good-fortune and my youth," said Totila, and turned to seek
Uliaris.

Uliaris told him that, in order to gain time, he had proposed an
armistice of three hours, which Belisarius, who wished for a parley,
had accepted.

"I will never capitulate! But we must have time to repair and
strengthen our walls. Will reinforcements never come? Hast thou still
no news from the King by sea?"

"None."


"The devil! Above six hundred of my Goths have fallen under these
hellish projectiles. I cannot even fill the most important posts. If I
had but four hundred men more!"

"Well," said Totila, reflecting, "I think I can procure thee these. In
the Castellum Aurelium, on the road to Rome, lie four hundred and fifty
men. Until now they have declared that they received from King
Theodahad the unreasonable but strict order, on no account to aid in
defending Neapolis. But in this, great necessity--I will go myself,
during the armistice, and do all I can to bring them."

"Do not go! The truce will have ended before thy return, and then the
road will be no longer safe. Thou canst not get through."

"I will get through by force or by cunning. Only keep firm until I am
back. Up! Thorismuth, to horse!"

While Totila, with Thorismuth and a few horsemen, galloped out of the
Porta Capuana, old Isaac, who had remained bravely on the walls without
tiring, took advantage of the armistice to return to his house, see his
daughter, and refresh himself with meat and wine.

As Miriam was bringing these, and anxiously listening to Isaac's report
of the progress of the siege, a hasty and unsteady foot was heard upon
the steps, and Jochem appeared before the astonished pair.

"Son of Rachel, whence comest thou in an evil hour, like a raven before
misfortune? How couldst thou enter? By what door?"

"That is my affair. I come, Father Isaac, once more to demand thy
daughter's hand--for the last time in my life."

"Is this a time for wooing and wedding?" asked Isaac indignantly. "The
city burns, and the streets are full of corpses."

"Why does the city burn? Why are the streets full of corpses? Because
the people of Neapolis hold by the people of Edom. Yes, this _is_ the
time to woo. Give me thy child. Father Isaac, and I will save thee and
her. I alone can do so."

And he attempted to take Miriam's hand.

"Thou save _me_!" she cried, starting back in disgust. "Rather would I
die!"

"Ha, proud girl!" cried the angry wooer; "thou wouldst be saved by the
fair-haired Christian? Let us see if he can save thee--the cursed
fellow!--from Belisarius and me. Ha! I will drag him through the
streets by his long yellow hair, and spit in his pale face!"

"Get thee away, son of Rachel!" said Isaac, rising and taking up his
spear. "I see thou art a friend of those who lie outside--the horn
sounds the recall; I must go down. But this I tell thee: many amongst
you will fall back dead before they can climb over these rotten walls."

"Perhaps," growled Jochem, "we shall fly over them, like the birds of
the air. For the last time, Miriam, I ask thee: Wilt thou leave this
old man and the cursed Christian? I tell thee the ruins of these walls
will soon cover them. I know that thou hast taken the Goth to thy
heart; but that I will forgive thee if only thou wilt be my wife."

And again he tried to take her hand.

"Thou wilt forgive me my love? Forgive what stands as high above thee
as the sun above the creeping worm? Should I be worthy to look upon his
face if I could become thy wife? Away! begone!"

"Ha!" cried Jochem, "too much! too much! My wife! Never shalt thou be
my wife; but thou shalt struggle in my arms, and I will tear the
Christian out of thy bleeding heart as it withers in despair! Thou
shalt see me again!"

And he left the room, and soon disappeared from the precincts of the
city.

Miriam, oppressed by anxious thoughts, hurried into the open air. She
felt that she must pray; but not in the close synagogue. She would pray
for _him_, and she would pray to _his_ God. She shyly ventured into the
neighbouring Basilica of St. Maria, whence, in peaceful times, the
Jewess had often been driven with curses.

But now the Christians had no time to curse.

She crouched in a dark corner of the chancel, and soon forgot herself,
the city, and the world, in fervent prayer.

She was alone with _him_ and with God.

Meanwhile, the last hour of the armistice was drawing to a close. The
sun already declined to the surface of the sea.

The Goths repaired and filled up the breaches of the walls with all
diligence, carried away the rubbish and the dead, and extinguished the
fires.

For the third time the sands of the hour-glass ran out, while
Belisarius, in front of his tent and surrounded by his generals, was
awaiting the signal of capitulation from the Castle of Tiberius.

"I don't believe in it," whispered Johannes to Procopius. "He who gives
such blows as I have seen given by that old man will never surrender.
And it is better so; then there will be a famous storming, and
afterwards a famous plundering."

Earl Uliaris now appeared upon the ramparts of the castle, and hurled
his spear defiantly among the waiting sentries.

Belisarius sprang up.

"The fools desire their own destruction! Well, they shall be gratified.
Up, generals! to the attack! Whoever is the first to plant our standard
on the walls shall have a tenth part of the booty!"

The leaders hurried away on all sides, spurred by avarice and ambition.

Johannes was just turning the ruined arch of an aqueduct, which
Belisarius had destroyed in order to deprive the besieged of water,
when he heard a low voice calling his name.

It was already so dark that he with difficulty recognised the man who
had spoken.

"What do you want, Jew!" asked Johannes. "I have no time to lose. There
is hard work to be done. I must be the first into the city."

"That you shall be, and without hard work, if you will follow me."

"Follow you? Do you know a way through the air over the walls?"

"No; but through the earth _under_ the walls. And I will show it you if
you give me a thousand solidi, and promise me a certain girl as booty."

Johannes stood still.

"You shall have what you like! Where is this way?"

"Here!" said Jochem, and struck the masonry with his hand.

"What? The aqueduct? How do you know?"

"I built it. A man can creep through it; there is no more water in it.
I have just come this way out of the city. The passage leads into an
old temple at the Porta Capuana. Take thirty men and follow me!"

Johannes looked sharply at him.

"And if you deceive me?"

"I will walk between your drawn swords. If I lie, kill me."

"Wait," cried Johannes, and hurried away.



                              CHAPTER IV.

Shortly afterwards Johannes again appeared, accompanied by his brother
Perseus and about thirty brave Armenian mercenaries, who carried,
besides their swords, short battle-axes.

"As soon as we are inside, Perseus," said Johannes, "you must break open
the sally-port to the right of the Porta Capuana at the moment when the
others unfold our flag upon the walls. At this signal my Huns, who wait
outside, will rush into the sally-port. But who keeps the tower at the
gate? Him we must have."

"Isaac, a great friend of the Edomites. He must die!"

"He dies!" said Johannes, and drew his sword. "Forward!"

He was the first to enter the passage of the aqueduct.

"Paukares and Gubazes, take the Jew between you. At the first
suspicion, down with him!"

And so, now creeping on all fours, now stooping and cautiously feeling
their way, in complete obscurity, the Armenians slid and crept after
Johannes, taking care not to make any noise with their weapons.

All at once Johannes cried in a low voice:

"Hold the Jew! down with him! Enemies! Arms! No, no; let him alone!" he
added quickly. "It was only a snake that rustled past me. Forward!"

"Now to the right," said the Jew; "here the passage leads into the
temple."

"What lies here?--bones?--a skeleton! I can bear it no longer! The
mouldy smell suffocates me! Help!" sighed one of the men.

"Let him lie! Forward!" ordered Johannes. "I see a star!"

"It is the daylight in Neapolis," said Jochem; "only a few steps more."

Johannes's helmet struck against the roots of a tall olive-tree, which
spread over the mouth of the passage in the atrium of the temple. We
know this tree. As he avoided the roots, Johannes struck his helmet
with a loud jingle against the side wall; he stopped short in alarm.
But he only heard the rapid flutter of the wings of numerous pigeons
which flew startled out of the branches of the olive-tree.

"What was that?" said a hoarse voice above him. "How the wind howls in
the old ruins!"

It was the widow Arria.

"O God!" she cried, kneeling before the cross, "deliver us from evil!
Let not the city fall until my Jucundus returns! Alas! if he does not
find his mother! Oh, let him again come the way he went that unhappy
day, when he descended into the secret labyrinth to seek the hidden
treasure! Show him to me as I saw him last night in my dream, rising up
from below the roots of the tree!"

And she turned to look at the hole.

"O dark passage! into which my happiness disappeared, give it up to me
again! God! by this way lead him back to me."

She stood exactly before the opening with folded hands, her eyes
piously raised to heaven.

Johannes hesitated as he issued from the hole and perceived her.

"She prays," he murmured. "Shall I kill her whilst praying!"


He waited; he hoped that she would turn away.

"It lasts too long! God knows I cannot help it!"

And he got quickly out from among the roots.

The old woman now raised her half-blind eyes; she saw a glittering form
rise from the earth. A ray of ecstasy flashed across her features. She
spread out her arms.

"Jucundus!" she cried.

It was her last breath.

The sword of the Byzantine had pierced her heart.

Without a cry, a smile upon her lips, she sank down amid the flowers;
Miriam's flowers.

Johannes turned and quickly helped up his brother Perseus, and then the
Jew and the first three soldiers.

"Where is the sally-port?"

"Here to the left. I will go and open it!"

Perseus directed the soldiers.

"Where are the steps to the tower?"

"Here on the right," answered Jochem--it was the staircase which led to
Miriam's chamber--how often had Totila slipped in there! "Be quiet! I
hear the old man."

It was really Isaac.

He had heard the noise from above; he came to the top of the steps with
his torch and spear.

"Who is it down there? is it thou, Miriam? who comes?" he asked.

"I, Father Isaac," answered Jochem; "I wished once more to ask----" and
he stealthily went up another step.

But Isaac heard the rattle of arms.

"Who is with thee!" he asked, advancing and holding out his torch. He
now saw the armed men crouching behind Jochem.

"Treachery! treachery!" he screamed; "die, thou blot upon the Hebrews!"
and he furiously struck his broad partisan into Jochem's heart, who
could not retreat.

Jochem fell dead among the soldiers.

"Treachery!" again cried Isaac.

But the next moment Johannes struck him down, sprang over his corpse,
hurried to the ramparts, and unfolded the flag of Byzantium.

Below the axes were busy; the sally-port fell, beaten down from within,
and with shrill cries--it was already quite dark--the Huns rushed by
thousands into the city.

All was over.

A portion filled the streets with carnage; one troop broke open the
nearest gates, letting in their comrades from outside.

Old Uliaris, with his little troop, hurried from the castle; he hoped
to drive the intruders out; in vain; a spear was hurled which felled
him to the ground.

And round his corpse fell, fighting bravely, the two hundred faithful
Goths who yet surrounded him.

Then, when they saw the imperial banner waving on the walls, the
citizens of Neapolis arose. Led by old friends to the Romans, such as
Stephanus and Antiochus the Syrian--Castor, a zealous friend of the
Goths, had lost his life in attempting to hold them back--they disarmed
the single Goths in the streets, and sent an embassy with thanks,
congratulations, and petitions for mercy on the city to Belisarius,
who, surrounded by his brilliant staff, now rode into the Porta
Capuana.

But he bent his majestic brow gloomily, and, without checking his
charger, answered:

"Neapolis has checked my progress for fifteen days, else I had already
been before Rome, even before Ravenna. How much do you think this delay
has robbed the Emperor of his right, and me of fame? For fifteen days
your cowardice and ill-will has caused you to be governed by a handful
of barbarians. The punishment for these fifteen days shall be only
fifteen hours of--pillage. Without murder; the inhabitants are the
Emperor's prisoners of war; without fire, for the city is a fortress of
Byzantium. Where is the leader of the Goths? Dead?"

"Yes," answered Johannes, "here is his sword. Earl Ularis fell."

"I do not mean him!" said Belisarius; "I mean the young one; Totila.
What has become of him? I must have him."

"Sir," said one of the Neapolitans, a rich merchant named Asklepiodot,
"if you will exempt my house and magazines from pillage, I will tell
you where he is."

But Belisarius made a sign, and two Moorish lancers took hold of the
trembling man.

"Rebel, do you make conditions to me? Speak! or torture shall unloose
your tongue!"

"Have pity! mercy!" cried the man. "During the armistice, Totila went
out with a few horsemen to fetch reinforcements from the Castle of
Aurelian. They may return at any moment."

"Johannes," cried Belisarius, "that man is worth all Neapolis. We must
take him! Have you, as I ordered, blocked the way to Rome, and manned
the gate?"

"In that direction no one can have left the city," said Johannes.

"Away! At once! We must entice him in! Let the Gothic banner fly from
the Castle of Tiberius and from the Porta Capuana. Send armed
Neapolitans upon the walls; he who warns Totila, even were it only with
a wink of his eye, dies! Arm my bodyguard with Gothic weapons. I will
be there myself. Place three hundred men in the neighbourhood of the
gate. Let Totila quietly in. As soon as he has passed the portcullis,
let it fall. I will have him alive. He shall not be wanting at the
triumph in Byzantium!"

"Give me the office, general," begged Johannes; "I owe him a return for
an ill stroke."

And he rushed back to the Porta Capuana, ordered the corpses and all
trace of combat to be removed, and took his further measures.

As the men were busy obeying his orders, a veiled figure forced its way
among them.

"For the good God's sake," begged a sweet voice, "let me get to him! I
will only see his body--oh, take care! Oh, my father! my father!"

It was Miriam, who had hastened home terrified by the noise made by the
plundering Huns. With the strength of despair she pushed back the
spears and took Isaac's grey head into her arms.

"Get away, girl!" said the soldier next to her, a very tall Bajuvar, a
mercenary of Byzantium; his name was Garizo. "Do not hinder us! we must
make the way clear. Into the grave with the Jew!"

"No, no!" cried Miriam, and pushed the man back.

"Woman!" he cried angrily, and lifted his axe.

But, spreading her arms protectingly over her father's body, and with
sparkling eyes, the girl fearlessly stood her ground. The soldier
suddenly fell back as if paralysed.

"Thou hast a bold heart, girl!" he cried, dropping his axe, "and thou
art as beautiful as the wood-nymph of the Liusacha! What can I do for
thee? Thou art wonderful to look at."

"If the God of my fathers has touched thy heart," said Miriam in her
pathetic voice, "help me to hide the body in the garden there--he has
long since dug his own grave near Sarah, my mother--with his face to
the east."

"It shall be done," said the Bajuvar, and obeyed her.

She carried the head, he the knees of the corpse. A few steps took them
into the little garden; there, under a weeping-willow, lay a stone; the
man pushed it away, and they laid the corpse in the grave, with its
face to the east.

Miriam looked into the grave without a word, without a tear; she felt
so forsaken, so lonely. The Bajuvar softly pushed the stone back into
its place, filled with compassion.

"Come!" he said.

"Whither?" asked Miriam in a low voice.

"Well, whither wilt thou go?"

"I do not know. I thank thee," she said, and took an amulet from her
neck and gave it to him. It was made of gold, a coin from the Jordan,
from the Temple.

"No!" said the man, and shook his head.

He took her hand, and pressed it to his eyes.

"So," he said, "that will do me good all my life long. Now I must go;
we must catch the Earl Totila. Farewell."

That name went to Miriam's heart. She cast one more look at the quiet
grave, and then slipped quickly out of the garden.

She wished to go through the gate on to the highroad, but the
portcullis was down, and at the gate stood men with Gothic helmets and
shields. She looked about her in surprise.

"Is all ready, Chanaranzes?" said a voice.

"All; he is as good as taken!"

"Hark! before the walls! horses trampling! It is they! Back, woman!"

Outside, a few horsemen were seen trotting towards the gate.

"Open, open the gate!" cried Totila from a distance.

Thorismuth rode up to him.

"I don't know how it is, I have no confidence," he cried. "The road
was so quiet, and so was the enemy's camp out there; scarcely a few
watch-fires were burning."

From the ramparts came a flourish of the Gothic horn.

"How horribly the fellow blows!" cried Thorismuth angrily.

"It must be an Italian," said Totila.

"Give the watch-word," was called from the walls in Latin.

"Neapolis!" cried Totila. "Dost thou hear? Uliaris has been obliged to
arm the citizens. Open the gate! I bring good news," he called to the
men above. "Four hundred Goths follow at my heels, and Italy has a new
king."

"Which is he!" asked some one inside, in a low voice.

"He on the white horse, the first one."

The gate was flung wide open; Gothic helmets filled the entrance;
torches shone; voices whispered.

"Up with the portcullis!" cried Totila, riding up. Thorismuth looked
anxiously before him, shading his eyes with his hand.

"They assembled yesterday at Regeta," Totila began again. "Theodahad is
deposed, and Earl Witichis----"

The portcullis was slowly raised, and Totila was just about to give his
horse the spur, when a woman rushed from the row of soldiers, and cast
herself before the animal's hoofs.

"Fly!" she cried. "The enemy is before you! the city is taken!"

But she could not finish; a lance penetrated her heart.

"Miriam!" cried Totila, horrified, and checked his horse.

But Thorismuth, who was close behind, and who had long been suspicious,
now reached his arm past the grating, and separated the rope which held
the portcullis up with his sword, so that the portcullis fell with a
loud crash just in front of Totila.

A hail of spears and arrows flew through the portcullis.

"Up with the portcullis!" cried Johannes from within. "Out! Upon them!"

But Totila did not move.

"Miriam! Miriam!" he cried in great grief.

Once more she opened her eyes, with a dying look of love and pain. That
look told everything; it pierced Totila's heart.

"For thee!" she sighed, and fell back.

He forgot Neapolis, danger, and death.

"Miriam!" he cried again, and stretched out both his hands.

An arrow touched his horse's flank; the noble animal reared. The
portcullis began to rise. Thorismuth caught Totila's bridle, wrenched
his horse round, and gave it such a stroke with the flat of his sword,
that it galloped away like the wind.

"Up and away, sir!" he cried, rushing after Totila. "They must be
speedy who would overtake us!"

And the riders flew back on the Via Capuana, the way that they had
come. Not far behind followed Johannes, ignorant of the way, and
confused by the darkness of the night.

Totila's party presently met with the garrison of the Castle of
Aurelian, which was marching towards Neapolis.

They all halted together upon a hill, whence they could see the city
and the ramparts, partially illuminated by the Byzantine watch-fires on
the walls.

Only then did Totila recover from his grief and consternation.

"Farewell, Miriam!" he sighed. "Farewell, Uliaris! Neapolis, I shall
see thee again!"

And he gave orders to march forward to Rome.

But from this hour a shadow fell upon the soul of the young Goth.
Miriam, with the holy right of suffering, had buried herself in his
heart for ever.

When Johannes returned from his fruitless pursuit, and sprang from his
horse, he cried in a furious voice: "Where is the girl who warned him?
Throw her to the dogs!" And he hurried away to Belisarius, to report
the mishap.

But no one could tell how the lovely corpse had disappeared. The horses
had trampled it beyond recognition, thought the crowd.

But _one_ knew better--Garizo, the Bajuvar.

He had borne her away from the tumult in his strong arms like a
sleeping child; had carried her into the little garden, had lifted the
stone from the scarcely-covered grave, and had laid the daughter
carefully by her father's side.

Then he stood still and contemplated her features. In the distance
sounded the tumult from the plundered town, in which the Huns of
Belisarius, in spite of his command, burned and murdered, and did not
even spare the churches, until the general himself, rushing amongst
them with his drawn sword, put a stop to the cruel work of destruction.

Such a noble expression lay upon Miriam's dead face, that Garizo did
not dare to kiss it, as he so much longed to do. So he placed her with
her face to the east, gathered a rose which was blooming near the
grave, and laid it upon her breast.

He wished to take part in the pillage, but he could not leave the
place; he turned back again. And all the night long, leaning on his
sword, he kept watch over the grave of the beauteous girl.

He looked up at the stars and repeated an ancient blessing on the dead,
which his mother had taught him in his home on the Liusacha. But that
did not satisfy him; he added a Christian paternoster.

And when the sun rose, he carefully placed the stone over the grave and
went away.

Thus Miriam had disappeared without leaving a trace behind.

But in Neapolis the people, who in secret were faithful to Totila, told
how his guardian angel had descended to save him, and had then
reascended to heaven.



                               CHAPTER V.

The fall of Neapolis had occurred a few days after the meeting at
Regeta, and Totila, on his march thither, met at Formiæ with his
brother Hildebad, whom King Witichis had at once sent off with a few
thousands to strengthen the garrison at Neapolis, until he himself
could follow with a larger force.

As things stood at present, the brothers could do nothing but fall back
upon the main army at Regeta, where Totila reported the sad events of
the last few days in Neapolis.

The loss of the third city of the realm--one of the main bulwarks of
Italy--changed the whole plan of the Gothic campaign.

Witichis had reviewed the troops assembled at Regeta; they amounted to
about twenty thousand men. These, with the little troop brought back by
Earl Teja on his own account, were, for the moment, the whole available
force. Before the strong divisions which Theodahad had sent away to
southern Gaul and Noricum, to Istria and Dalmatia--although they had
been summoned in all haste--could return, all Italy might be lost.

Notwithstanding, the King had resolved to throw himself, with these
twenty thousand, into the fortress of Neapolis, and there oppose the
superior forces of the enemy, until reinforcements should arrive.

But now that the strong city had fallen into Belisarius's hand,
Witichis gave up this plan. His composed courage was as far from
foolhardiness as from timidity. And the King was obliged to force
himself to a far more painful resolve.

While, during the days following Totila's arrival in the camp before
Rome, the grief and anger of the Goths sought relief in cursing the
traitor Theodahad, Belisarius, and the Italians; while the bold youth
here and there began to grumble at the King's delay, who would not lead
them against these degenerate Greeks, four of whom it took to stand
against one Goth; while the impatience of the army already began to
rebel against inactivity, the King acknowledged to himself, with a
heavy heart, that it was necessary to retreat still farther, and even
give up Rome.

Day by day news came of the increase of the army of Belisarius. At
Neapolis alone he had gained ten thousand men--at once hostages and
comrades. From all sides the Italians joined his flag; from Neapolis to
Rome, no place was strong enough to oppose such a force, and the
smaller towns on the coast opened their gates to the enemy with
rejoicing.

The Gothic families dwelling in those parts fled to the camp of the
King, and told how, the very day after the fall of Neapolis, Cumæ and
Atilla had succumbed; then followed Capua, Cajeta, and even the
fortified Benevento.

The vanguard of Belisarius--Huns, Saracens, and Moorish horsemen--was
already stationed before Formiæ.

The Goths expected and desired a battle before the gates of Rome. But
Witichis had long since seen the impossibility, with an army of only
twenty thousand men, of encountering Belisarius, who, by that time,
would be able to muster a hundred thousand in the open field.

For a time he entertained the idea of being able to hold the mighty
fortifications of Rome--Cethegus's proud work--against the Byzantine
incursion; but he was soon obliged to renounce even this hope.

The population of Rome now counted--thanks to the Prefect--more armed
and practised men than they had possessed for many a century, and the
King daily convinced himself of the spirit which animated them.

Even now the Romans could scarcely restrain their hatred of the
barbarians; it was not only evinced by unfriendly and mocking gestures;
already the Goths dared not venture into the streets except in
well-armed numbers, and every day single Gothic sentries were found
dead, stabbed from behind.

Witichis could not conceal from himself that the different elements of
the popular feeling were organised and guided by cunning and powerful
leaders: the heads of the Roman aristocracy and the Roman clergy. He
was obliged to confess that, so soon as Belisarius should appear before
the walls, the Roman population would rise, and, together with the
besiegers, would overcome the weak Gothic garrison.

So Witichis had unwillingly resolved to give up Rome and all central
Italy; to throw himself into the strong and faithful city of Ravenna;
there to complete the very incomplete armament of the troops, to unite
all the Gothic forces, and then to seek the enemy with an equally
powerful army.

This resolution was a great sacrifice. For Witichis had his full share
of the Germanic love of fight, and it was a hard blow to his pride to
retreat and seek for means of defence, instead of striking at once.

But there was still more.

It was inglorious for a king who had been raised to the throne of the
cowardly Theodahad because of his known courage, to begin his rule with
a shameful retreat. He had lost Neapolis during the first days of his
reign; should he now voluntarily give up Rome, the city of splendours?
Should he give up more than the half of Italy? And if he thus
controlled his pride for the sake of his people--what would that people
think of him?

These Goths, with their impetuosity, their contempt of the enemy! Could
he be sure of enforcing their obedience?

For the office of a Germanic king was more to advise and propose, than
to order and compel. Already many a ruler of this people had been
forced against his will to engage in war and suffer defeat. He feared a
similar thing.

With a heavy heart, he one night paced to and fro his tent in the camp
at Regeta.

All at once hasty steps drew near, and the curtain of the tent was
pulled open.

"Up! King of the Goths!" cried a passionate voice. "It is no time now
to sleep!"

"I do not sleep, Teja," said Witichis; "since when art thou returned?
What bringest thou?"

"I have just entered the camp; the dews of night are still upon me.
First know that they are dead!"

"Who?

"The traitor and the murderess!"

"What! hast thou killed them both?"

"I kill no woman. I followed Theodahad, the traitor-king, for two days
and two nights. He was on the way to Ravenna; he had a fair start. But
my hatred was swifter than his cowardice. I overtook him near Narnia;
twelve slaves accompanied his litter. They had no desire to die for the
miserable man; they threw away their torches and fled. I tore him out
of his litter, and put my own sword into his hand. But he fell upon his
knees, begged for his life, and, at the same moment, aimed a
treacherous stroke at me. Then I slew him like an ox at the altar; with
three strokes--one for the realm, two for my parents. And I hung him up
by his belt to a withered yew-tree on the high-road, a prey to the
birds of the air, and a warning to the kings of the earth."

"And what became of her?"

"Her end was terrible," said Teja, shuddering. "When I first passed
through Rome, nothing was known of her but that she had refused to
follow the coward-king. He fled alone. Gothelindis called her
Cappadocian mercenaries together, and promised them heaps of gold, if
they would keep by her, go with her to Dalmatia, and occupy the
fortress of Salona. The men hesitated and wished to see the gold. Then
Gothelindis promised to bring it, and left them. Since then she had
disappeared. When I passed through Rome the second time, she had been
found----"

"Well?"

"She had ventured into the Catacombs alone, without a guide, to fetch
the treasure which had been hidden there. She must have lost herself in
the labyrinth; she could not find the way out. Mercenaries who were
sent to seek her, found her still alive; her torch was not burnt down,
but was almost entire; it must have gone out soon after she had entered
the Catacombs. Madness shone from her eyes; fear of death and a long
despair had overcome this bad woman; she died as soon as she was
brought to the light."

"Horrible!" cried Witichis.

"A just punishment!" said Teja. "But listen!"

Before he could continue, Totila, Hildebad, Hildebrand, and several
other Goths rushed into the tent.

"Does he know!" asked Totila.

"Not yet," said Teja.

"Rebellion!" cried Hildebad, "rebellion! Up, King Witichis! Defend thy
crown! Off with the boy's head!"

"What has happened?" asked Witichis quietly.

"Earl Arahad of Asta, the vain fool! has rebelled. Immediately after
you had been chosen King, he rode off to Florentia, where his elder
brother, Guntharis, the proud Duke of Tuscany, lives and rules. There
the Wölfungs have found many adherents. Arahad called upon the Goths
everywhere to protect the 'Royal Lily,' as they call her, Mataswintha,
the true heir to the throne! They have proclaimed her Queen. She was in
Florentia at the time, and therefore fell at once into their hands. It
is not known if she be the prisoner of Guntharis or the wife of Arahad.
It is only known that they have enlisted Avarian and Gepidian
mercenaries, and armed all the adherents of the Amelungs and their kith
and kindred, together with the numerous adherents of the Wölfungs. Thee
they call the 'Peasant-King;' they intend to take Ravenna!"

"Oh, send me to Florentia, with only three thousand," cried Hildebad
angrily; "I will bring you this Queen of the Goths, together with her
aristocratic lover, imprisoned in a bird-cage!"

But the others looked anxious.

"Things look bad," said Hildebrand. "Belisarius with his hundred
thousands before us--at our backs the wily Rome--our main forces still
fifty miles off--and now civil war and rebellion in the heart of the
nation!"

But Witichis was as quiet and composed as ever.

"It is perhaps better so," he said. "We have now no choice. We _must_
retreat."

"Retreat!" asked Hildebad angrily.

"Yes; we dare not leave an enemy at our backs. To-morrow we break up
the camp and go----"

"Forward to Neapolis!" asked Hildebad.

"No. Back to Rome. And farther! To Florentia, to Ravenna! The spark of
rebellion must be trampled out ere it burst into a flame."

"What? Thou wilt retreat before Belisarius?"

"Yes, to advance all the more irresistibly, Hildebad. The string of the
bow is also stretched backward to hurl the deadly arrow with the
greater force."

"Never," cried Hildebad; "thou canst not--thou darest not do that!"

But Witichis stepped quietly up to him and laid his hand upon his
shoulder.

"I am thy King. Thou thyself hast chosen me. Loud above all the others
sounded _thy_ cry: 'Hail, King Witichis!' Thou knowest--God knows--that
I did not stretch forth my hand for the crown. You yourselves have
pressed it upon my brow. Take it off, if you can entrust it to me no
longer. But as long as I wear it, trust me and obey. Otherwise you and
I are lost!"

"Thou art right," said sturdy Hildebad, and bent his head. "Forgive me;
I will make it good in the next fight."

"Up, my generals," concluded Witichis, putting on his helmet. "Thou,
Totila, wilt hasten to the Frank Kings in Gaul, on an important
embassy. You others hasten to your troops; break up the camp; at
sunrise we march to Rome."



                              CHAPTER VI.

A few days later, on the eve of the entry of the Goths into Rome, we
find the young "knights," Lucius and Marcus Licinius, Piso the poet,
Balbus the corpulent, and Julianus the young advocate, assembled in
confidential talk at the Prefect's house.

"So this is the list of the blind partisans of the future Pope
Silverius--of my envious enemies? Is it complete?"

"It is. I have made a great sacrifice for you, general," cried Lucius
Licinius, "If, as my heart impelled me, I had at once joined
Belisarius, I should have already shared in the taking of Neapolis,
instead of watching here the stealthy footsteps of the priests, and
teaching the plebeians to march and man[oe]uvre."

"They will never learn it again," observed Marcus.

"Be patient," said Cethegus quietly, and without looking up from a roll
of papyrus which he held in his hand. "You will be able, soon enough
and long enough, to wrestle with these Gothic bears. Do not forget that
fighting is only a means, and not an end."

"I don't know that," said Lucius doubtfully.

"Freedom is our aim, and freedom demands power," said Cethegus.
"We must first again accustom these Romans to shield and sword, or
else----"

He was interrupted by the entrance of the ostiarius, who announced a
Gothic warrior.

The young Romans exchanged indignant looks.

"Let him in," said Cethegus, putting his writings into a casket.

There entered hastily a young man, clad in the brown mantle of the
Gothic soldier, a Gothic helmet on his head, who threw himself on the
Prefect's neck.

"Julius!" exclaimed Cethegus, coldly repulsing him. "Do we meet again
thus? Have you, then, become a complete barbarian? How did you come to
Rome?"

"My father, I accompanied Valeria, under Gothic protection. I come from
smouldering Neapolis."

"Aha!" cried Cethegus. "Have you fought with your blond friend against
Italy? That becomes a Roman well! Does it not, Lucius?"

"I have neither fought nor will fight in this unhappy war. Woe to those
who have kindled it!"

Cethegus measured him with cold looks.

"It is beneath my dignity, and beyond my patience, to represent to a
Roman the infamy of such sentiments. Alas! that my Julius should be
such a renegade! Shame upon you, before these your compatriots! Look,
Roman knights, here is a Roman without love of freedom, without anger
against the barbarians!"

But Julius quietly shook his head.

"You have not yet seen the Huns and Massagetæ of Belisarius, who are to
bring you freedom. Where, then, are the Romans of whom you speak? Has
Italy risen to throw off her fetters? Can she still rise? Justinian
fights with the Goths, not we. Woe to the people which is liberated by
a tyrant!"

In secret Cethegus confessed that Julius was right; but he would not
suffer such words to be spoken before his friends.

"I must dispute with this philosopher in private," he said. "Let me
know if anything occur among the priesthood."

And the tribunes went, casting contemptuous looks at Julius.

"I should not like to hear what my friends say of you," said Cethegus,
looking after them.

"It is quite indifferent to me. I listen to my own thoughts, and not to
those of others," responded Julius.

"He has become a man!" said Cethegus to himself.

"My deepest and best feelings have brought me here," continued Julius.
"I feel that this war is accursed. I come to save you, and take you
from this sultry air, from this world of deceit and lies. I beseech
you, my friend, my father, follow me to Gaul!"

"_I_ leave Italy at the moment of the liberators' approach! You must
know that it was I who called them; _I_ kindled this war, which you
call accursed!"

"I feared it," said Julius sadly. "But who will deliver us from our
deliverers? Who will end the struggle?"

"I!" said Cethegus, with quiet majesty. "And you, my son, shall help
me. Yes, Julius, your fatherly friend, whom you think so cold and
indifferent, can also be enthusiastic, though not for girls' eyes and
Gothic friendships. Leave these boys' pastimes; you are now a man.
Give me the last joy of my desolate life, and be the sharer of my
battles and the inheritor of my victories! It is for Rome, freedom,
power! Boy, can my words not move you? Imagine," he continued, more
warmly--"imagine these Goths, these Byzantines--I hate them as heartily
as you do--exhausted by each other and overcome. On the ruins of their
power Italy--Rome--will rise in all its ancient splendour! Again the
ruler of the East and West will sit enthroned upon the Capitoline Hill.
A new Roman Emperor, prouder than ever your Cæsar-forefather dreamed
of, will extend order, blessing, and awe over all the earth----"

"And the ruler of this Empire will be called--Cethegus Cæsarius!"

"Yes; and after him, Julius Montanus! Up, Julius! you are no man if
this goal does not tempt you!"

"I am dizzy," said Julius admiringly. "The goal is high as the stars;
but your ways--are crooked. Ah! if they were straight, by God! I would
share your steps! Yes; call the Roman youth to arms; cry to both the
barbarian forces, 'Out of our holy Latium!' make open war against the
barbarians and against the tyrants, and I will stand or fall at your
side."

"You know well that this is impossible."

"And, therefore--it is your aim!"

"Fool! do you not see that it is common to form a structure from good
material, but that it is divine by one's own strength to create a new
world out of nothing?"

"Divine? By cunning and lies? No!"

"Julius!"

"Let me speak plainly; for that purpose am I come. Oh that I could call
you back from the demoniac path, which will only lead you to
destruction! You know that I ever loved and honoured you. But what I
hear whispered of you by Greeks, Goths, and Romans, is not in tune with
this reverence."

"What do they whisper?" asked Cethegus proudly.

"I do not like to think of it. But everything terrible that has
happened lately--the death of Athalaric, Camilla, and Amalaswintha, the
landing of the Byzantines--is named as the work of a demon, who is the
author of all evil; and this demon--is you! Tell me, simply and truly,
that you are free from this dark----"

"Boy," exclaimed Cethegus, "are you my confessor, and would call me to
account? First learn to understand the aim before you blame the means.
Do you think that history is built of roses and lilies? Who wills what
is great must do great things, whether the small call it good or bad."

"No, no, I repeat. Cursed be the aim which only leads to crime! Here
our paths divide."

"Julius, do not go. You despise what was never before offered to mortal
man. Let me have a son, for whom I can strive, to whom I can bequeath
the inheritance of my life."

"Curses and blood stick to it! And even if I could enter at once
upon this inheritance, I should reject it. I will go, so that I may not
see your image grow still darker. But I beg one thing: when the day
comes--and it will come--when you are weary of all this bloodshed and
crime, and of the aim itself which necessitated such deeds, then call
me. I will come to you, wherever I may be, and I will wrest you from
the demoniac power which enthralls you, were it at the price of my own
life."

At first a smile of mockery passed across the Prefect's lips, but he
thought, "He still loves me. 'Tis good; I will call him when the work
is finished. Let us see if he can then resist--if he will refuse the
Empire of the world."

"Well," he said aloud, "I will call you when I need you. Farewell."

And, with a cold gesture, he dismissed the youth, who was overcome with
emotion.

But as the door closed behind Julius, the Prefect took a small medal of
embossed bronze from a box, and contemplated it for some time.

He was about to kiss it.

But suddenly the sarcastic expression again passed across his lips.

"Shame on thee, Cethegus!" he exclaimed, "before Cæsar's face!"

And he put the medal back into the box.

It was the head of a woman, and very like Julius.



                              CHAPTER VII.

Meanwhile it had become quite dark. The slave brought the pretty bronze
lamp of Corinthian workmanship--an eagle, which carried the ball of the
sun in its beak, filled with scented Persian oil.

"A Gothic warrior waits outside, sir; he wishes to speak with you
alone. He looks very insignificant. Shall he lay down his arms?"

"No," answered Cethegus. "We do not fear the barbarians. Let him in."

The slave went, and Cethegus laid his right hand upon the dagger in the
bosom of his tunic.

A stately Goth entered, the cowl of his brown mantle drawn over his
head. He now threw it back.

Cethegus started forward in astonishment.

"What leads the King of the Goths to me?"

"Softly!" said Witichis. "No one need know what we two transact. You
know that yesterday and to-day my army has entered Rome from Regeta.
You do not know that we leave Rome to-morrow!"

Cethegus looked amazed.

"It surprises you?"

"The city is secure," said Cethegus quietly.

"Yes; but not the fidelity of the Romans. Benevento has already gone
over to Belisarius. I have no wish to allow myself to be crushed
between Belisarius and you."

Cethegus was prudently silent; he did not know to what this would lead.
At last he asked:

"Wherefore are you come. King of the Goths?"

"Not to ask you how far the Romans may be trusted; and also not to
complain that we can trust you so little--you, whom Theodoric and his
daughter overwhelmed with benefits--but honestly and simply to arrange
a few things with you, for our mutual well-being."

Cethegus was surprised. In the proud frankness of this man lay
something which he envied. He would gladly have despised it.

"We shall leave Rome," continued Witichis, "and shortly afterwards the
Romans will admit Belisarius. It is sure to be so; I cannot hinder it.
I have been advised to take the heads of the aristocracy as hostages."

Cethegus started, and with difficulty hid the movement.

"You before all, the Princeps Senatus."

"Me?" said Cethegus, smiling.

"I shall leave you here. I know well that you are the soul of Rome."

Cethegus cast down his eyes, "I accept the oracle," he thought.

"But for that very reason I leave you here," Witichis continued.
"Hundreds who call themselves Romans would like the Byzantines for
masters. You--you would not have it."

Cethegus looked inquiringly at him.

"Do not deceive me. Do not try to deceive me. I am no man of craft or
cunning! but my eye penetrates men's natures. You are too proud to
serve Justinian, and I know that you hate us. But neither do you love
these Greeks, and you will suffer them no longer than is necessary.
Therefore I leave you here; I know you love this city."

There was something about this man which compelled Cethegus to
admiration.

"King of the Goths," he said, "you speak plainly and nobly, like a
king. I thank you. It shall not be said of Cethegus that he does not
understand magnanimous words. It is as you say. I shall keep my Rome
Roman with all my might."

"Good!" said Witichis. "See, I have been warned against your wiles; I
know much of your secret plans; I guess still more; and I know that I
have no weapon against deceit. But you are no liar. I knew that a manly
word would touch you; and trust disarms every enemy who is worthy of
being called a man."

"You honour me. King of the Goths. That I may deserve your trust, let
me warn you. Do you know who are the warmest friends of Belisarius?"

"I know it: Silverius and the priests."

"Right! And do you know that, as soon as the old Pope, Agapetus, is
dead, Silverius will ascend the Bishop's Chair?"

"So I hear. I was advised to take him as a hostage too. I shall not do
so. The Italians hate us enough already. I will not meddle with the
wasps' nest of the priests. I fear martyrs."

But Cethegus would gladly have been rid of the priest, "He will be
dangerous in the Chair of Peter," he said warningly.

"Let him alone! The possession of this country will not be decided by
the schemes of the priesthood."

"Well," said Cethegus, taking the roll of papyrus, "I have here,
accidentally, the names of his warmest friends; there are men of
importance amongst them."

He would have pressed the list upon Witichis, hoping that then the
Goths would take his most dangerous enemies away with them.

But Witichis refused the list.

"'Tis no matter! I shall take no hostages at all. Of what use is it to
take off their heads? _You_, shall answer to me for Rome."

"What do you mean by that? I cannot keep Belisarius away."

"You shall not. Belisarius is sure to come, but, rely upon it, he will
go away again. We Goths will overcome this enemy; perhaps only after a
hard fight, but most certainly. And then there will be a second fight
for Rome!"

"A second?" asked Cethegus quietly. "With whom?"

Witichis laid his hand upon the Prefect's shoulder, and looked into his
face with eyes as clear as sunshine.

"With you, Prefect of Rome!"

"With me?" and Cethegus tried to smile, but could not.

"Do not deny what is dearest to you, man. It is not worthy of you. I
know for whom you have built the gates and ramparts round this city;
not for us and not for the Greeks! for yourself! Be quiet! I know you
meditate, or I guess it. Not a word! Be it so. Shall Greek and Goth
struggle for Rome, and no Roman? But listen: let not a second wearing
war carry off our people. When we have overcome the Byzantines and
driven them out of our Italy--then, Cethegus, I will expect you before
the walls of Rome. Not for a battle between our people, but for single
combat. Man against man, you and I will lose or win Rome."

In the King's look and tone lay such dignity, magnanimity, and
sublimity, that the Prefect was confused.

In secret he would have mocked at the simplicity of the barbarian, but
it seemed to him as if he could never more respect himself, if he were
incapable of esteeming, honouring, and responding to such greatness.

So he spoke without sarcasm.

"You dream, Witichis, like a Gothic boy."

"No, I think and act like a Gothic man. Cethegus, you are the only
Roman whom I would honour thus. I have seen you fight in the wars with
the Gepidæ. You are worthy of my sword. You are older than I; well, I
will give you the advantage of the shield!"

"You Germans are very singular," said Cethegus involuntarily. "What
fancies!"

But now Witichis frowned.

"Fancies! Woe to you, if you are not able to feel what speaks in me.
Woe to you, if Teja be right! He laughed at my plan and said, 'The
Roman will not understand that!' And _he_ advised me to take you with
me a prisoner. I thought more highly of you and Rome. But know: Teja
has surrounded your house; and are you so mean or so cowardly as not to
comprehend me, we shall take you from your Rome in chains. Shame upon
you, that you must be forced to do what is honourable!"

But now it was Cethegus's turn to get angry.

He felt abashed. The chivalry of Witichis was strange to him, and it
vexed him that he could not mock at it. It vexed him to be compelled;
that his free choice had been mistrusted. A furious hatred in return
for Teja's contempt, and anger at the King's brutal frankness, flamed
up in his soul. He would gladly have thrust his dagger into the Goth's
broad breast.

He had been almost on the point of giving his word in good earnest from
a soldierly feeling of honour.

But now a very different, hateful feeling of malignant joy flashed
across his mind. The barbarians had mistrusted him, they had despised
him; now they should certainly be deceived!

Coming forward with a keen look, he grasped the King's hand.

"Be it so!" he said.

"Be it so!" repeated Witichis, giving his hand a strong pressure. "I am
glad that I was right and not Teja. Farewell! Guard our Rome! From you
I will demand her again in honourable combat."

And he left the house.

"Well!" said Teja, who waited outside with the other Goths. "Shall I
storm the house?"

"No," said Witichis; "he has given his word."

"If he will only keep it!"

Witichis started back in indignation.

"Teja! thy gloomy mind renders thee too unjust! Thou hast no right to
doubt a hero's honour. Cethegus is a hero!"

"He is a Roman! Good-night!" said Teja, sheathing his sword. And he
turned another way with his Goths.

But Cethegus tossed all night upon his couch. He was at variance with
himself.

He was vexed with Julius.

He was bitterly vexed with Witichis, more bitterly still with Teja.

But most with himself.


The next day Witichis once again assembled people. Senate, and the
clergy of the city, at the Thermæ of Titus. From the highest step of
the marble staircase of the handsome building, which was filled with
the leaders of the army, the King made a simple speech to the Romans.

He declared that he must leave the city for a short time, but that he
would soon return. He reminded them of the mildness of the Gothic
government, of the benefits of Theodoric and Amalaswintha, and called
upon them courageously to oppose Belisarius, in case of his advance,
until the Goths returned to reinforce them. The newly-drilled
legionaries and the strong fortifications made a long resistance
possible.

Finally he demanded the oath of allegiance, and asked them once more to
defend their city to the death against Belisarius. The Romans
hesitated; for their thoughts were already in Belisarius's camp, and
they disliked to perjure themselves.

Just at this crisis a solemn hymn was heard in the direction of the Via
Sacra; and past the Flavian Amphitheatre came a long procession of
priests, swinging censers, and singing psalms.

In the night Pope Agapetus had died, and, in all haste, Silverius, the
archdeacon, had been appointed as his successor.

Solemnly and slowly the crowd of priests advanced; the insignia of the
Bishop of Rome were carried in front; choristers with silvery voices
sang sweet and sacred airs. At last the Pope's litter appeared open,
richly gilt, and shaped like a boat.

The bearers walked slowly, step by step, in time to the music; pressed
upon by crowds of people, who were eager to receive the blessing of
their new Bishop.

Silverius bent his head to the right and left, and blessed the people
repeatedly.

A number of priests and a troop of mercenaries, armed with spears,
closed the procession.

It halted in the middle of the square. The Arian and Gothic warriors,
who stood sentry at all the entrances of the place, silently watched
the solemn and splendid procession, the symbol of a church which was
their enemy; while the Romans greeted the appearance of their Apostolic
Father all the more joyfully, because his voice could calm their
scruples of conscience as to the oath to be given.

Silverius was just about to begin his address to the people, when the
arm of a gigantic Goth, stretched over the side of his litter, pulled
him by his gold-brocaded mantle.

Indignant at this very irreverent interruption, Silverius turned his
face with a severe frown; but the Goth, unabashed, repeated the pull,
and said:

"Come, priest, thou must go up to the King!"

Silverius thought it would have been more becoming if the King had come
down to him, and Hildebad seemed to read something of this feeling on
his features, for he cried:

"It cannot be helped! Stoop, priest!"

And herewith he pressed his hand upon the shoulder of one of the
priests who carried the litter. The bearers now set the litter down;
Silverius left it with a sigh, and followed Hildebad up the steps.

When the priest reached Witichis, the latter took his hand, advanced
with him to the edge of the steps, and said:

"Roman citizens, your priest has been chosen for your Bishop; I ratify
the choice; he shall become Pope, as soon as he has sworn the oath of
allegiance, and has taken for me your oaths of fealty. Swear, priest!"

For one moment Silverius was confounded.

But immediately recovering himself, he turned with an unctuous smile to
Witichis.

"You command?" he asked.

"Swear," said Witichis, "that in our absence you will do all that you
can to keep this city of Rome faithful to the Goths, to whom you owe so
much, to further us in all things, and to hinder the progress of our
enemies. Swear fidelity to the Goths!"

"I swear," said Silverius, turning to the people. "And thus I, who have
power to bind and to loose, call upon you, Romans, surrounded as you
are by Gothic weapons, to swear in the same spirit in which I myself
have taken the oath."

The priests and some of the nobility appeared to have understood, and
lifted their hands to swear without delay.

Then the mass hesitated no longer, and the place echoed with the loud
shout: "We swear fidelity to the Goths!"

"It is well, Bishop of Rome," said the King, "we count upon your oath.
Farewell, Romans! We shall soon meet again."

And he descended the broad flight of steps. Teja and Hildebad followed
him.

"Now I am only curious--" said Earl Teja.

"Whether they will keep their oath?" interposed Hildebad.

"No; not at all. But how they will break it. Well, the priest will find
out the way."

With flying standards the Goths marched out of the Porta Flaminia,
leaving the city to its Pope and the Prefect. Meanwhile Belisarius
approached by forced marches upon the Via Latina.



                             CHAPTER VIII.

The city of Florentia was full of eager and warlike activity. The gates
were closed; on the ramparts and bastions paced numerous sentinels; the
streets rang with the clatter of mounted Goths and armed mercenaries;
for Guntharis and Arahad had thrown themselves into this fortress, and,
for the present, had made it the main stronghold of the rebellion
against Witichis.

The two brothers lived in a handsome villa which Theodoric had built on
the shores of the Arnus, in the suburb but still within the enclosure
of the walls.

Duke Guntharis of Tuscany, the elder, was a far-famed warrior, and had
been for years the commander of the city of Florentia. Within this
district lay the estates of his powerful family, cultivated by
thousands of farmers and vassals; his power in this city and district
was unlimited, and Duke Guntharis was resolved to use it to the utmost.

In full armour, his helmet upon his head, Guntharis walked impatiently
to and fro his marble-wainscoted room, while his younger brother, in
festive garments and unarmed, leaned silently and thoughtfully against
a table, which was covered with letters and parchments.

"Decide; make haste, my boy!" cried Guntharis, "it is my last word.
To-day thou wilt obtain the consent of the obstinate child, or I--dost
thou hear?--I will go myself to fetch it. But then, woe be to her. I
know better than thou how to manage a capricious girl."

"Brother, thou wilt not do that?"

"By the Thunderer! but I will. Dost think I will risk my head, and
delay the good-fortune of my house, for the sake of thy sentimental
consideration? Now is the time to procure the first place in the nation
for the Wölfungs; the place which by right belongs to them, and from
which the Amelungs and Balthes have ousted them for centuries. The last
daughter of the Amelungs, once thy wife, no one can dispute thy
possession of the throne; and my sword will protect it against the
Peasant-King, Witichis. But we must not delay too long. I have yet no
news from Ravenna, but I fear the city will only acknowledge
Mataswintha, and not us; that is, not us alone. And whoever has
Ravenna, has Italy, since Neapolis and Rome are lost; therefore that
strong fortress must be ours. To insure this, Mataswintha must become
thy wife before we reach the walls of Ravenna; else it will be reported
that she is more our prisoner than our Queen."

"Who desires it more ardently than I? But yet I cannot use compulsion!"

"No? Why not? Seek her and win her, well or ill. I go to strengthen the
guard upon the walls. When I return I must have an answer."

Duke Guntharis went; and his brother made his way, sighing, into the
garden to seek Mataswintha.

This garden had been laid out by a skilled freedman from Asia Minor. In
the background he had formed a kind of park, the glades of which, free
from flowerbeds or terraces, were luxuriantly green. Through the
flowery grass and amongst the thick oleanders flowed a clear brook.

Close to the edge of the brook lay, stretched upon the turf, a youthful
female figure. She had thrown her mantle back from her right arm, and
seemed to be playing, now with the murmuring ripples, now with the
nodding flowers on the brink. She was buried in thought, and at
intervals threw a violet or a crocus dreamily into the water, watching
the blossoms with slightly opened lips, as they were swiftly borne away
by the running stream.

Close behind her kneeled a young girl in the dress of a Moorish slave,
busily weaving a wreath of flowers, which only wanted the finishing
touches. Every now and then she looked at her meditative mistress, to
see if she noticed her secret occupation. But the lady seemed quite
lost in reverie.

At last the pretty wreath was finished; with laughing eyes the slave
placed it lightly upon the splendid auburn hair of her mistress, and
bent forward over her shoulder to meet her eyes. But the lady had not
felt the flowers touch her head. Then the little slave became
impatient, and, pouting, said:

"But, mistress, by the palms of the Auras! of what art thou thinking?
With whom art thou?"

"With him!" whispered her mistress.

"By the white goddess! I can bear it no longer," cried the little
slave-girl, springing up; "it is too bad; I shall die of jealousy!
Thou not only forgettest me, thy gay gazelle, but also thine own
beauty--and all for this invisible man! Only look into the water and
see how beautifully thy bright hair contrasts with the dark violets and
white anemones."

"Thy wreath is pretty!" said Mataswintha, taking it off and throwing it
gently into the water. "What sweet flowers! Greet him from me!"

"Oh, my poor flowers!" cried the slave, looking after them; but she did
not dare to scold. "Only tell me," she cried, sitting down again beside
her mistress, "how all this is to end? We have been here now for many
days, we do not rightly know if as Queen or prisoner? In any case we
are in the power of strangers. We have never set our feet out of thy
apartments or of this well-walled garden, and know nothing of the
outside world. But thou art ever still and happy, as if it must be so!"

"And it must be so!"

"Indeed? and how will it end?"

"_He_ will come and set me free."

"Truly, White Lily, thou hast strong faith. If we were at home in
Mauretania, and I saw thee looking at night at the stars, I should say
that thou hadst read everything there. But in this way I do not
understand it," and she shook her black locks, "and I shall never
understand it."

"But thou shalt and wilt, Aspa!" said Mataswintha, raising herself, and
putting her white arm tenderly round the girl's brown neck; "thy
faithful love has long since deserved this reward, the best that I can
give thee."

A tear rose in the slave's dark eye.

"Reward?" she said. "Aspa was stolen by wild men with long red locks.
Aspa is a slave. Every one has scolded and beaten her. Thou boughtest
me as a flower is bought. But thou strokest my cheek and my hair. Thou
art as beautiful as the Goddess of the Sun, and thou speakest of
reward?"

And she nestled her head upon the bosom of her mistress.

"Thou art my gazelle!" said Mataswintha; "thou hast a heart of gold.
Thou shalt know all; thou shalt hear what is known to none but myself.
Listen; my childhood was without love, without joy; and yet my young
soul needed both. My poor mother had ardently longed for a boy, for an
heir to the throne--and she treated the girl who was born to her with
dislike, coldness, and severity. When Athalaric was born, she became
less harsh but more cold; all her love and care went to the heir to the
throne. I should not have felt it, had I not seen just the contrary in
my tender father. I felt that he also suffered under the coldness of
his wife, and the sick man often pressed me to his heart with tears and
sighs. And when he was dead and buried, all the love in the world was
dead for me. I saw little of Athalaric; he was educated by other
teachers in another part of the palace. I saw my mother still less;
scarcely ever, unless she had to punish me. And yet I loved her so
much! And I saw how my nurses and teachers loved their own children,
and kissed and petted them; and my heart longed with all its might for
similar warmth and affection. So I grew up like a pale flower without
sunshine! My favourite place in all the world was the grave of my
father Eutharic, in the large palace garden at Ravenna. There, with the
dead, I sought the love which I did not find in the living; and
whenever I could escape my attendants, I hurried there to indulge in my
longing and to weep. The older I grew, the more this longing increased.
In the presence of my mother I was forced to hide all my feelings; she
despised me if I showed them. As I grew up I saw very well that
people's eyes were fixed upon me as if in admiration; but I thought
that they pitied me, and that pained me.

"And more and more frequently I took refuge by the grave of my father,
until they told my mother that I always wept there and returned quite
disordered. My mother angrily forbade me to go to the grave, and spoke
of contemptible weakness. But I revolted against this prohibition. Then
one day she surprised me there, and struck at me, and yet I was no
longer a child. She took me back to the palace and scolded me
violently, threatening to send me away; and, as she left me, she said
angrily: why had heaven punished her with such a child! That was too
much. Unspeakably miserable, I resolved to run away from this mother,
to whom I was a punishment, and to go where no one knew me, I did not
know whither. I would most gladly have joined my father in his quiet
tomb. When evening came, I stole out of the palace, and hurried once
more to the grave to take a long farewell. The stars were already out.
I slipped out of the garden and the palace, and hastened through the
dark streets to the Faventinian Gate. I managed to slip past the
sentinel, and ran a little way along the high-road, into the night;
straight to misery. But a man in armour came along the road towards me.
As I tried to pass him, he suddenly came up to me, looked into my face,
and gently laid his hand upon my shoulder, saying 'Whither, Lady
Mataswintha, whither goest thon alone, and so late at night?' I
trembled under his hand, tears burst from my eyes, and I cried,
sobbing, 'I am desperate!' Then the man took hold of both my hands and
looked at me; so kindly, so mildly, so sadly! He dried my tears with
his mantle, and said, in a tone of the warmest kindness, 'Wherefore?
what troubles thee so?' I felt both happy and miserable at the sound of
his voice. And as I looked into his kind eyes, I could no longer
control myself. 'Because my mother hates me,' I cried; 'because there
is no love for me on earth!' 'Child, child, thou art sick,' he said,
'and ravest! Come, come back with me. Thou! only wait. Thou wilt yet be
a queen of love.' I did not understand him. But I loved him, oh so
much! for these words, for this kindness. Helplessly, inquiringly, and
with astonishment I looked into his face. My trembling aspect must have
touched him, or he thought it was the cold. He took off his warm
mantle, folded it round me, and led me slowly back through the gate and
little frequented streets to the palace. Helpless, and tottering like a
sick child, I followed him, my head, which he carefully concealed,
resting on his breast. He was silent, and only sometimes dried the
tears from my eyes. Unremarked, as I believed, we reached the door of
the palace staircase. He opened it and gently pushed me in. Then he
pressed my hand. 'Be good,' he said, 'and quiet. Happiness will come to
thee, be sure; and love enough.' And he gently laid his hand upon my
head, pulled the door to behind him, and descended the steps. But I
leaned against the half-closed door, and could not go away. My feet
denied their service; my heart beat. Then I heard a rough voice below
addressing him. 'Whom dost thou smuggle at night into the palace, my
friend?' it asked. But he answered, 'Is it thou, Hildebrand? Thou wilt
not betray her! It was the child Mataswintha; she had strayed into the
city in the dark, and feared the anger of her mother.' 'Mataswintha!'
said the other. 'She daily becomes more beautiful.' And my protector
said----"

Mataswintha hesitated, and a vivid flush overspread her cheeks.

"Well!" asked Aspa, looking at her with open eyes, "what did he say?"

But Mataswintha drew Aspa's small head down upon her bosom.

"He said," she whispered--"he said, 'She will become the most beautiful
woman on earth.'"

"He said truly," cried the little slave; "why shouldst thou become red?
It is so. But go on. What didst thou do next?"

"I crept up to my bed and wept; wept tears of sorrow, delight, and
love, all at once. That night a whole world, a heaven, was opened to
me. He liked me, I felt it; and he called me beautiful. Yes, now I knew
it. I was beautiful, and I was glad; for I wished to be so for _his_
sake. Oh, how happy was I! Meeting with him had brought light into my
darkness, and a blessing to my life. I knew now that I might be liked
and loved. I took care of my person, which _he_ had praised. The sweet
power in my heart spread a mild warmth over my whole being; I became
softer and more earnest. Even my mother's severity relaxed when I met
her harshness with gentleness; and daily all hearts were turned to me
more kindly, as I became more tender. And for all this I had to thank
him. He had saved me from rushing into shame and misery, and had won
for me a whole world of love. Since then I have lived, and live, only
for him."

And she ceased, and laid her hand upon her beating heart.

"But, mistress, when did you see or speak to him again? Does your love
live on such scanty nourishment?"

"I have never spoken to him again, and have only seen him once. On the
day of Theodoric's death, he commanded the guards of the palace, and
Athalaric told me his name; for I had never dared to inquire about him,
lest my flight, and ah! my secret, should be discovered. He was not at
court; and if he sometimes came there, I was away."

"So thou knowest nothing further of him? of his life; of his past?"

"How could I inquire! My blushes would have betrayed me. Love is the
child of silence and of longing. But I know all about his--about _our_
future."

"About his future?" laughed Aspa.

"Yes. At every solstice there used to come to the court an old woman
named Radrun, and she received from King Theodoric strange herbs and
roots, which he sent for from Asia and the Nile purposely for her. She
had asked for this as the sole reward for having foretold his fortune
when a boy, and everything had been fulfilled. She brewed potions and
mixed salves; they called her in public 'the woman of the woods,' but
in private, 'the Wala, the witch.' And we at court knew--all except the
priests, who would have forbidden it--that every summer solstice, when
she came, the King let her prophesy to him the events of the coming
year. And when she left him, I knew that my mother, Theodahad, and
Gothelindis, called her and questioned her, and what she foretold
always came to pass. So the next solstice I took heart, watched for the
old woman, and when I found her alone, enticed her into my room, and
offered her gold and shining stones if she would tell me my fortune.
But she laughed, and drew forth a little flask made of amber. 'Not for
gold, but for blood!' she said, 'the pure blood of a king's child.' And
she opened a vein in my left arm, and received the blood into her amber
flask. Then she looked at both my hands, and said, 'He whom thou
holdest in thy heart will give thee glory and good fortune, will bring
thee paralysing pain, will be thy consort, but not thy husband!' And
with this she went away."

"That is of little comfort as far as I can make it out."

"Thou dost not understand the old wife's sayings; they are all so dark.
She adds a threat to every promise, so as to be safe in all cases. But
I hold fast to the bright and not to the dark side. I know that he
will be mine, and give me glory and good fortune; I will bear the
accompanying pain. Pain for his sake is delight."

"I admire thee and thy faith, mistress. And for the saying of the witch
thou hast refused all the kings and princes. Vandals and Ostrogoths,
from Gaul and Burgondia, who have ever wooed thee? Even Germanus, the
imperial prince of Byzantium? And you wait for him?"

"And I wait for him! But not only because of this saying. In my heart
lives a little bird, which sings to me every day, 'He will be thine, he
must be thine.' I know it for a certainty," she concluded, raising her
eyes to the sky, and relapsing into her former reverie.

Steps were heard approaching from the villa.

"Ah!" cried Aspa, "thy dainty suitor! Poor Arahad! his trouble is in
vain."

"I will make an end to it," said Mataswintha, rising, and on her brow
and in her young eyes there now lay an angry severity, which told of
the Amelung blood in her veins. There was a strange mixture of burning
passion and melting tenderness in the girl. Aspa had often been
astonished by the repressed fire which her mistress sometimes betrayed.
"Thou art like the divine mountains of my home," she said, "snow on the
summit, roses round the middle, but consuming fire in the interior,
which often streams over snow and roses."

Meanwhile Earl Arahad turned out of the shady path, and approached the
lovely girl with a blush which became him well.

"I come, Queen----" he began.

But she harshly interrupted him.

"I hope, Earl of Asta, that at last thou comest to put an end to this
despicable game of force and lies. I will bear it no longer. Thy bold
brother surprises me--me, the helpless orphan, lost in sorrow for her
mother--in my apartments, calls me in one breath his Queen and his
prisoner, and keeps me for weeks in unworthy confinement. He gives me
the purple, and deprives me of liberty. Then thou comest and tormentest
me with thy vain pursuit, which will never succeed. I refused thee when
at liberty. Dost thou believe, thou fool, that, a prisoner in thy
power, the child of the Amelungs will listen to thee? Thou swearest
that thou lovest me; well, then, respect me! Honour my will and set me
free, or tremble when my liberator comes."

And she advanced threateningly towards Arahad, who, confused, could
find no words with which to answer her.

Just then Duke Guntharis hurried up with a hot and angry face.

"Up, Arahad!" he cried, "make an end. We must away at once! He
approaches; he presses forward with a strong force."

"Who?" asked Arahad hastily.

"He says he comes to set her free. He has gained a victory--the
Peasant-King! He has beaten our outposts at Castrum Sivium."

"Who?" now asked Mataswintha eagerly.

"Well," cried Guntharis angrily, "thou mayest as well know it; it can
be no longer concealed--Earl Witichis of Fæsulæ!"

"Witichis!" cried Mataswintha with beaming eyes and a beating heart.

"Yes; the rebels at Regeta, forgetting the rights of the nobility, have
chosen him King of the Goths."

"He! he my King!" said Mataswintha, as if in a dream.

"I should have told thee when I greeted thee as Queen, but in thy
chamber stood his bust, crowned with laurel. That seemed to me
suspicious. I saw it later more closely; it was an accidental
resemblance; it was a head of Ares."

Mataswintha was silent, and tried to hide the blushes which rose into
her cheeks.

"Well," cried Arahad, "what is to be done now?"

"We must away. We must reach Ravenna before him, Florentia will hinder
him for a time. Meanwhile we shall take Ravenna, and when thou hast
consummated thy marriage with Mataswintha in the palace of Theodoric,
all the people of the Goths will turn to us. Up, Queen! I will order
thy carriage to be prepared; in an hour thou wilt go to Ravenna,
guarded by my troops."

And the brothers hurried away.

Mataswintha looked after them with flashing eyes.

"Yes! lead me away, bound and a prisoner. Like an eagle from the height
my King will swoop upon you, and save me from your cruel clutches.
Come, Aspa, the liberator approaches!"



                              CHAPTER IX.

Scarcely had the Goths turned their backs upon the walls of Rome, when
Pope Silverius--the very day after taking the oath--summoned the heads
of the priesthood and nobility, the officials and citizens, to a
council in the _Thermæ_ of Caracalla.

Cethegus was also invited, and appeared.

Without the least embarrassment, Silverius moved that, as at last the
hour was come in which to cast off the yoke of the heretics, an embassy
should be sent to Belisarius, the commander-in-chief of the orthodox
Emperor--the only rightful master of Italy--to deliver up the keys of
the Eternal City, and to recommend the Church and the faithful to his
protection against the vengeance of the barbarians.

The scruples of a very young priest and of an honest smith, on account
of their yesterday's oath, he dismissed with a smile, appealing to his
Apostolic power to bind and to loose, and pointing to the evident force
put upon them while taking the oath, by the presence of Gothic arms.

Upon this the motion was carried unanimously, and the Pope himself,
Scævola, Albinus, and Cethegus, appointed as ambassadors.

But Cethegus put in a protest. He had silently listened to the motion
and had not joined in the vote. Now he rose and said:

"I am against the motion; not on account of the oath. I need not appeal
to the Apostolic power, for I did not swear. But on account of the
city. That is, we must not unnecessarily arouse the just anger of the
Goths, who may very easily return, and who would not then take the
Apostolic dispensation as an excuse for such open perjury. Let
Belisarius either beg us or compel us. Who throws himself away is ever
trampled on."

Silverius and Scævola exchanged significant glances.

"Such sentiments," said the jurist, "will doubtless be very pleasing to
the Emperor's general, but can alter nothing in our decision. So you
will not go with us to Belisarius?"

"I will go to Belisarius, but not with you," said Cethegus, and left
the place.

As the others were leaving the Thermæ, the Pope said to Scævola:

"That will finish him! He has declared against the surrender before
witnesses!"

"And he goes himself into the lion's den!"

"He shall not leave it again. You have drawn up the act of accusation?"

"Long ago. I feared that he would take the mastery of the city into his
own hands, and now he goes himself to Belisarius! That proud man is
lost."

"Amen," said Silverius. "And so may all fall who in their worldly
endeavours oppose the holy Petrus.--The day after to-morrow, at the
fourth hour, we will set forth."

But the Holy Father erred; the proud man was not yet to fall.

Cethegus had hastened immediately to his house, where his Gallic
chariot awaited him.

"We start at once," he called to the slave who sat on the foremost
horse; "I will only fetch my sword."

In the vestibule he met the two Licinii, who were watching for him
impatiently.

"To-day is the day," cried Lucius, "with the prospect of which you have
so long comforted us!"

"Where is the proof of your trust in our courage, our skill, and our
fidelity!" asked Marcus.

"Patience!" said Cethegus, lifting his forefinger; and he went into his
study.

He shortly reappeared, his sword and many papers under his left arm, a
sealed roll in his right hand. His eyes flashed.

"Is the outermost gate of the Moles Hadriani ready?" he asked.

"Ready," answered Lucius Licinius.

"Is the grain from Sicily stored in the Capitol?"

"All stored."

"Are the weapons distributed, and the ramparts of the Capitol completed
as I ordered?"

"All complete," answered Marcus.

"Good. Take this roll. Break the seal as soon as Silverius has left the
city, and punctually execute every word therein. It concerns not only
my life and yours--but Rome! The city of Cæsar will be witness of your
actions. Go. Farewell till we meet again!"

And the fire in his eyes kindled an answering fire in the hearts of the
young Romans.

"You shall be content!"

"You and Cæsar!" they said, and hurried away.

With a smile that seldom illumined his features with such radiance,
Cethegus sprang into his carriage.

"Holy Father," he said to himself, "I am still in your debt for that
last meeting in the Catacombs. I will repay it well!"

"Down the Via Latina!" he cried to the slaves; "and let the horses
gallop as hard as they can!"

The Prefect had more than a day's start of the embassy. And he used his
advantage well.

He had, with unchecked energy, thought of a plan by which he would
remain master of Rome in spite of the landing of Belisarius. And he set
about its execution with all his habitual caution.

He had been scarcely able to control his impatience during the journey.
At last he reached the outposts of the Byzantines at Capua, where
Johannes, the commander, sent his younger brother Perseus and a few
horsemen to lead him to the head-quarters.

Arrived in the camp, Cethegus did not ask for the commander-in-chief,
but caused himself to be conducted at once to the tent of the
privy-councillor, Procopius of Cæsarea.

Procopius had been his fellow-student in the Schools of Law at Berytus;
and the two gifted men had attracted each other greatly.

But not the warmth of friendship led the Prefect first of all to this
man. Procopius knew the whole political past of Belisarius, and was
probably the confidant of his future plans.

The privy-councillor greeted the friend of his youth with great
pleasure. He was a man of sound commonsense, one of the few men of
science of that time, whose capability of healthy feeling and simple
apprehension had not been suffocated by the artificial ornaments of
Byzantine knowledge in the Schools of Rhetoric.

Clear sense was expressed on his open brow, and in his still youthfully
bright eyes shone delight in all that was good.

When Cethegus had washed off the dust and heat of travel in a
carefully-prepared bath, his host, before inviting him to the evening
meal in his tent, led him round the camp, and showed him the quarters
of the principal divisions, pointing out the most famous generals, and,
in a few words, describing their peculiarities, their services, and the
often singular contrasts of their past lives.

There were the sons of rude Thracia, Constantinus and Bessas, who had
worked their way up from the rank of rough hirelings; brave soldiers,
but without culture, and filled with the presumption of self-made men.
They considered themselves to be the indispensable supports and equally
capable successors of Belisarius.

There was the aristocratic Iberian Peranius, of the royal family of the
Iberians, the hostile neighbours of Persia, who had given up his
fatherland and hope of the crown out of hatred to the Persian
conqueror, and had taken service in the Emperor's army.

Then Valentinus, Magnus, and Innocentius, daring, leaders of
the horsemen; Paulus, Demetrius, Ursicinus, the leaders of the
foot-soldiers; Ennes, the Isaurian chief and commander of the Isaurians
of Belisarius; Aigan and Askan, the leaders of the Massagetæ;
Alamundarus and King Abocharabus, the Saracens; Ambazuch and Bleda, the
Huns; Arsakes, Amazaspes, and Artabanes, the Armenians (the Arsakide
Phaza had been left behind in Neapolis with the rest of the Armenians);
Azarethas and Barasmanes, the Persians; and Antallas and Cabaon, the
Moors.

All these Procopius knew and named, praising sparingly, but expressing
his blame with great enjoyment, in biting but witty phrases.

They had just turned towards the quarters of Martinus, the peaceful
town-burner, on the right, when Cethegus, standing still, asked:

"And whose is the silken tent there on the hill, with the golden stars
and purple ensign? The guards carry golden shields!"

"There," said Procopius, "dwells his Invincible Daintiness, the Upper
Purple-Snail Intendant of the Roman Empire, Prince Areobindos, whom may
God enlighten!"

"The Emperor's nephew, is he not?"

"Yes; he married the Emperor's niece, Projecta; his highest and only
merit. He was sent here with the Imperial Guard to vex us, and to take
care that we do not win too easily. He has been made of equal rank with
Belisarius, understands as little of warfare as Belisarius does of
purple-snails, and is to be Governor of Italy."

"Indeed!" said Cethegus.

"When we encamped he insisted upon having his tent placed to the right
of Belisarius. But we would not consent. Fortunately God, in His
wisdom, had created that hill centuries ago for the solving of our
dispute as to rank, and now the Prince is indeed placed to the left,
but higher than Belisarius."

"And whose are the gay tents yonder, behind the quarters of Belisarius?
Who dwells there?"

"There?" answered Procopius, with a sigh. "A very unhappy woman;
Antonina, the wife of Belisarius."

"She unhappy? The celebrated Antonina, the second empress? Why?"

"It is not well to speak of that in the open camp. Come with me to my
tent, the wine will be sufficiently cooled."



                               CHAPTER X.

In the tent they found the handsome cushions of the camp-bed placed
round a low bronze table of perforated work, which Cethegus admired.

"It is a piece of booty from the wars of the Vandals; I took it with me
from Carthage. And these soft cushions once lay upon the bed of the
Persian King; I gained them in the battle of Dara."

"You are a fine practical scholar!" said Cethegus, smiling. "Are you so
changed since the days of Athens?"

"I should hope so!" said Procopius, and began carving (for he had
dismissed the attendant slaves) the smoking haunch of venison before
him. "You must know that I wished to make philosophy my calling, to
become a sage. For three years I listened to the Platonists, Stoics,
and Academicians at Athens; and studied till I was sick and stupid. And
I did not stop at philosophy; according to the praiseworthy custom of
our pious century, theology must also be grappled with, and for another
year I had to reflect upon the mysteries of the Holy Trinity. Well,
with studying so hard, my reason, which was not at all contemptible by
nature, threatened to fail me. Fortunately, I became seriously ill, and
the physicians forbade me Athens and all books. They sent me to Asia
Minor. I only saved a 'Thucydides' from my books, and took it with me
in my travelling-bag. And then 'Thucydides' saved me. In the tedium of
the journey I read and re-read his splendid history of the deeds of the
Hellenes in war and peace; and now I found with astonishment that the
acts and manners of men, their passions, their vices and virtues, were
really much more attractive and remarkable than all forms and figures
of heathen logic--not to speak of Christian logic. I arrived at
Ephesus, and was one day strolling through the streets, when my mind
suddenly became wonderfully enlightened. I was walking across a great
place; there stood before me a church of the Holy Spirit; it was built
upon the ruins of the old Temple of Diana. On the left stood a ruined
altar of Isis, and on the right the praying-house of the Jews. Then the
thought flashed across me: Each one of these believed, and believed
firmly, that he alone knew the truth about the highest Being. And yet
that is impossible; the highest Being has, it seems to me, no need of
being known by us--neither should I, in His place--and He has created
mankind, that they may live, act rightly and strive honestly here on
earth. And this living, acting, enjoying and striving is really all
that concerns us. If any one will search and think, he should search
the lives and acts of men. As I stood so thinking, all at once I heard
the flourish of trumpets. A brilliant troop of horsemen came trotting
up; at their head a splendid man on a bay horse, beautiful and strong
as the God of War. Their weapons glittered, the flags waved, and the
horses pranced. And I thought: These know wherefore they live, and do
not need to inquire of a philosopher! And while I was admiring the
horsemen, a citizen of Ephesus clapped me on the shoulder and said:
'You seem not to know who that was, nor whither these men are bent?
That is the hero Belisarius, who is off for the wars in Persia!' 'Good,
friend!' I said, 'then I will go with him!' And so I did, the very same
hour. And Belisarius soon appointed me his privy-councillor and
secretary. Since then I have a double calling; by day I make, or help
to make, history, and by night I write it."

"And which is your best work?"

"Alas! friend, the writing! And the writing would be better if the
history were better. For generally I do not at all approve of what we
do, and I only help to do it because it is better than doing nothing,
or putting up with philosophy. Bring the 'Tacitus,' slave," he called
out of the opening of the tent.

"The 'Tacitus?'" asked Cethegus.

"Yes, friend, we have drunk enough of the 'Livius.' You must know that
I name my wines according to their historical character. For example,
to return to what I was saying, this piece of history which we are
about just now, this Gothic war, is quite against my taste. Narses is
right, we ought first to repel the Persians before we attack the
Goths."

"Narses! What is my wise friend doing?"

"He envies Belisarius, and will not confess it even to himself. Besides
that, he makes plans of wars and battles. I will bet that he had
already conquered Italy before we had even landed."

"You are not his friend. Yet he is a man of genius. Why do you prefer
Belisarius?"

"I will tell you," said Procopius, pouring out the "Tacitus," "It is my
misfortune that I was not the historian of Alexander or Scipio. Since I
recovered from philosophy and theology, my whole nature has longed for
men, for real men of flesh and blood. So these spindle-shanked emperors
and bishops and generals, who subtilise everything with their reason,
disgust me. We have become a crippled generation; the hero time lies
far behind us! Only honest Belisarius is a hero like those of the olden
time. He might have encamped with Agamemnon before Troy! He is not
stupid; he has good sense; but only the natural sense of a noble wild
animal for its prey, for his vocation. Belisarius's vocation is
heroism! And I delight in his broad chest and his flashing eyes and
mighty thighs with which he masters the strongest stallion. And I am
glad when, sometimes, his blind delight in blows upsets all his fine
plans. I love to see him rush amongst the enemy and fight like an
infuriated boar. But I dare not tell him so; for then all would be
over; in three days he would be cut to pieces. On the contrary, I keep
him back. I am his 'reason,' as he calls me. And he puts up with my
prudence because he knows that it is not cowardice. More than once I
have been obliged to save him from a difficulty into which the
frowardness of his heroism had brought him! The most amusing of these
stories is that of the horn and tuba."

"Which of the two do you blow, O my Procopius?"

"Neither; only the trumpet of fame and the pipe of mockery!"

"But what about the horn and trumpet?"

"Oh, we were lying before a rocky nest in Persia, which we were obliged
to take, because it commanded the high-road. But we had already, many
times, damaged our heroic heads against its hard walls; and my master,
becoming angry, swore 'by the slumber of Justinian'--that is his biggest
oath--that he would never blow the signal of retreat before this Castle
of Anglon. Now our outposts were very often surprised by sallies from the
fortress; we, in the highly-situated camp, could see the assaulters as
they issued from the fortress, but our outposts, lying at the foot of
the hill, could not. I now advised that we should give our people the
signal of retreat from the camp whenever we saw the danger approaching.
But I met with a fine reception! The slumber of Justinian was such a
sacred thing that no one dare meddle with an oath sworn by it. And so
our poor fellows were obliged to let themselves be taken unawares by
the Persians, until I hit upon the ingenious expedient of proposing to
my master that we should give the signal of retreat to our men not with
the trumpet but with the horn. The idea pleased my honest Belisarius.
And so when we merrily blew the horn to the attack, our men ran away
like frightened hares. It was enough to make one die with laughing to
see those belligerent sounds produce such a despicable effect! But it
availed. Justinian's slumber and Belisarius's oath remained intact, our
outposts were no more butchered, and at last the rocky fortress fell.
Thus I always scold and laugh at Belisarius for his heroic acts, but in
reality my heart is warmed and gladdened: he is the last hero."

"Well," observed Cethegus, "amongst the Goths you will find many such
sturdy fellows."

Procopius nodded reflectively:

"Can't deny that I have great pleasure in these Goths. But they are too
stupid."

"How? Why?"

"They are stupid because, instead of pressing upon us slowly, step by
step, in union with their yellow-haired brethren (they would be
irresistible!) they have planted themselves singly in the midst of
Italy, without right or reason, like a piece of wood in the centre of a
glimmering hearth. They will be ruined by this; they will be burnt, you
will see!"

"I hope to see it. And what then?" asked Cethegus quietly.

"Yes," answered Procopius peevishly, "what then? That is the vexation.
Then Belisarius will be Governor of Italy--for it will not last a year
with the purple Prince--and he will wear away his fine strength here in
idleness, when there is work enough to do in Persia. And then, as his
court-historian, I shall only have to write down how many skins of wine
we empty yearly."

"So you would like, when the Goths are done with, to have Belisarius
out of Italy?"

"Certainly. In the Persian land bloom his and my laurels. I have
thought already of many a plan to get him away from here."

Cethegus was silent. He was glad to have found such an important ally
for his plans. At last he said:

"And so his 'reason' Procopius, rules the lion Belisarius?"

"No," sighed Procopius; "rather his _un_reason, his wife!"

"Antonina! Tell me, why did you call her unhappy?"

"Because she is half-hearted and a contradiction. Nature intended her
for a good and faithful wife; and Belisarius loves her with all his
heroic heart. But she came to the court of the Empress. Theodora, the
beautiful she-devil, is intended by nature as much for vice as is
Antonina for virtue. The circus-girl has certainly never felt the sting
of conscience. But I believe she cannot endure to have an honest woman
near her, because an honest woman would despise her. She did not rest
until she had succeeded in arousing Antonina's coquetry by her hellish
example. Now Antonina suffers tortures of remorse on account of her
dalliance with her adorers; for she loves, she worships her husband."

"And yet? How is it possible that a hero like Belisarius cannot content
her?"

"Just because he is a hero. He does not flatter her, with all his love.
She could not bear to see the Empress's lovers exhaust themselves in
verses, flowers, and gifts, and to live herself without such homage.
Vanity was her snare. But she does not feel at all at ease amidst her
trifling."

"And has Belisarius any suspicion?"

"Not a shadow. He is the only one in all the Roman Empire who does not
know what most concerns him. I believe it would be his death. For this
reason alone he must not remain here in peace, as Governor of Italy. In
the camp, in the tumult of battle, flatterers are wanting to the
coquettish woman and also the leisure to listen to them. For, as if
in voluntary atonement for the sweet crimes of secret verses and
flowers--she is certainly incapable of greater guilt--Antonina outdoes
all other women in the severe performance of her duty. She is
Belisarius's friend, his co-commander; she shares with him the
difficulties and dangers of sea, desert, and battle. She works with him
day and night, if she does not happen to be reading the verses of
others on her lovely eyes! She has often saved him from the snares of
his enemies at the court of Byzantium. In short, she is only good
during war-time and in the camp, there, where also his greatness can
alone flourish."

"Well," said Cethegus, "now I know well enough how things stand
here. Let me speak plainly with you. You would like to have Belisarius
out of Italy immediately after his victory: so would I. You for
Belisarius's sake, I for that of Italy's. You know that I was always a
Republican----"

At this Procopius pushed his cup to one side and looked significantly
at Cethegus.

"All young people are so between the ages of fourteen and twenty-one,"
said he. "But that you are still so--I find--very--very--unhistorical.
Out of these Italian vagabonds, our very amiable allies against the
Goths, you will make citizens of a republic? They are good for nothing
but a tyrant!"

"I will not dispute about that," answered Cethegus with a smile; "only
I should like to preserve my fatherland from _your_ tyrant."

"I don't blame you for it," said Procopius, smiling also; "the
blessings of our rule are--stifling."

"A native governor under the protection of Byzantium will suffice at
first."

"To be sure. And his name would be--Cethegus!"

"If it must be so--that too."

"Listen," said Procopius earnestly, "I would only advise you against
_one_ thing. The air of Rome engenders proud plans. There, as master of
Rome, a man is not willing to be only the second in the world. And
believe the historian--nothing more can come of the universal Empire of
Rome."

Cethegus felt annoyed. He thought of King Theodoric's warning.

"Historicus of Byzantium, I know my Roman affairs better than you.
First let me initiate you into our Roman secrets; then, early
to-morrow, before the embassy arrives from Rome, procure me an
interview with Belisarius, and--be sure of a great success."

And he now began to unfold to the astonished Procopius, in rapid
outlines, the secret history of the latest times and his plans for the
future, wisely veiling his ultimate aim.

"By the manes of Romulus!" cried Procopius, when he had finished, "you
still make history on the Tiber. Well, here is my hand. You shall have
my assistance. Belisarius shall win, but not rule in Italy. Let us
empty a flask of dry 'Sallustius' upon it!"

Early the next day Procopius brought about an interview with
Belisarius, from which his friend returned well contented.

"Have you told him everything?" asked the historian.

"Not quite everything," said Cethegus with a sly smile; "one must
always keep something to say in reserve."



                               CHAPTER XI.

Shortly afterwards the whole camp was full of strange excitement.

The report of the approach of the Holy Father, which outsped his gilded
litter, aroused thousands of soldiers, attracted by feelings of
reverence, piety, superstition, or curiosity, from sleep, feasting, or
gaming. The captains could scarcely keep the sentries at their posts or
the soldiers at their drill.

The faithful had hurried to meet the Pope from places miles distant,
and now, mixed with groups of country people from the neighbourhood,
accompanied the procession into the camp. The peasants and soldiers had
already harnessed themselves to the litter instead of the mules which
drew it--in vain had the Pope modestly remonstrated--and shouting in
exultation: "Hail to the Bishop of Rome, hail to the holy Petros!" the
crowd, upon whom Silverius continually bestowed blessings, entered the
camp. No one noticed his two colleagues, Scævola and Albinus.

Belisarius gravely observed the imposing spectacle from his tent.

"The Prefect is right!" he cried; "this priest is more dangerous than
the Goths! Procopius, dismiss the Byzantine body-guard at my tent, as
soon as the interview begins. Let the Huns and the heathen Gepidæ take
their place."

So saying, he re-entered his tent, where, surrounded by his generals,
he shortly afterwards received the Roman embassy.

Procopius had convinced Prince Areobindos of the necessity of leaving
the camp on an expedition of reconnaissance, an office which could only
be performed by him, and which could not be put off.

Surrounded by a brilliant train of clergy, the Pope approached the tent
of the commander-in-chief. Great crowds of people pressed after him;
but as soon as he, with Scævola and Albinus, had entered the narrow
passage between the tents which led up to that of Belisarius, the
guards stopped the way with their levelled lances, and would allow
neither priest nor soldier to follow.

Silverius turned with a smile to the captain of the guard, and preached
him a fine sermon on the text, "Suffer little children to come unto me,
and forbid them not."

But the German shook his shaggy locks and turned his back. The Gepidian
did not understand a word of Latin beyond the words of command.

Silverius smiled again, once more blessed the crowd, and then walked
quietly to the tent. Belisarius was seated upon a camp-stool, over
which was spread a lion's skin; on his right hand sat Antonina,
enthroned on a seat covered with the skin of a leopard. Her troubled
soul had hoped to find a physician and comforter in the holy Petrus;
but she shrank when she saw the worldly expression on the features of
Silverius.

As the Pope entered, Belisarius rose.

Silverius, without the slightest inclination, went straight up to him,
and laid both hands--he was obliged to stretch his arms uncomfortably
to do so--as if in blessing, on his shoulders. He wished to press
Belisarius gently down upon his knees; but the general stood as stiffly
erect as an oak, and Silverius was obliged to complete his benediction.

"You come as ambassadors from the Romans?" began Belisarius.

"I come," interrupted Silverius, "in the name of St. Peter, as Bishop
of Rome, to deliver to you and the Emperor the city of Rome. These good
people," he added, pointing to Scævola and Albinus, "have attached
themselves to me as the members to the head."

Scævola was about to interfere indignantly--he had not thus understood
his relation to the Church--but Belisarius signed to him to be silent.

"And," continued Silverius, "I welcome you to Italy and Rome in the
name of the Lord. Enter the walls of the Eternal City for the
protection of the Church and the faithful against the heretics! There
exalt the name of the Lord and the Cross of Christ, and never forget
that your path thither was smoothed by Holy Church. God chose me for
His minister, to lull the Goths into blind security, and lead them out
of the city. It was I who won over the wavering citizens to your cause,
and frustrated the designs of your enemies. It is St. Peter who, by my
hand, delivers up to you the keys of his city, and entrusts it to your
protection. Never forget my words!"

With this he handed to Belisarius the keys of the Asinarian Gate.

"I will never forget them," said Belisarius, and signed to Procopius,
who took the keys from the hand of the Pope. "You spoke of the designs
of my enemies. Has the Emperor enemies in Rome?"

Silverius answered, with a sigh:

"Cease to question me, general. Their nets are torn; they are now
harmless, and it does not become the Church to inculpate, but to
_ex_culpate."

"It is your duty, Holy Father, to discover to the orthodox Emperor the
traitors who hide themselves amongst his Roman subjects, and I call
upon you to unmask his enemies."

Silverius sighed.

"The Church does not thirst for blood."

"But she may not prevent justice," said Scævola. And the jurist stepped
forward, and handed a roll of parchment to Belisarius, saying, "I
accuse Cornelius Cethegus Cæsarius, the Prefect of Rome, of treachery
and rebellion against Emperor Justinian. He has called the Emperor's
government a tyranny; he opposed the landing of the imperial army with
all his might; finally, a few days ago he, and he alone, voted that we
should not open to you the gates of Rome."

"And what punishment do you propose?" asked Belisarius, looking at the
roll.

"Death, according to the law," said Scævola.

"And his estates," added Albinus, "are lawfully forfeited, partly to
the fiscus, partly to his accusers."

"And may his soul be recommended to the mercy of God!" concluded the
Bishop of Rome.

"Where is the accused?" asked Belisarius.

"He intended to come to you; but I fear that his bad conscience will
prevent him from fulfilling his intention."

"You err. Bishop of Rome," said Belisarius; "he is already here."

At these words a curtain in the background of the tent dropped, and
before his astonished accusers stood Cethegus the Prefect.

They could not conceal their surprise. With a look of contempt,
Cethegus silently advanced until he stood at Belisarius's right hand.

"Cethegus sought me earlier than you," said the commander-in-chief,
after a pause, "and he has been beforehand with you also--in
accusations. You stand before me gravely accused, Silverius. Defend
yourself before you attack others."

"I defend myself!" cried the Pope. "Who can be accuser or judge of the
successor of St. Peter?"

"The judge am I; in the place of your master, the Emperor."

"And the accuser?" asked Silverius.

Cethegus half turned to Belisarius, and said:

"I am the accuser! I accuse Silverius, the Bishop of Rome, of the crime
of lese-majesty and treachery to the Roman Empire. I will at once prove
my accusation. Silverius intends to wrest the government of the city of
Rome and a great part of Italy from the Emperor Justinian, and,
ridiculous to say, to form a State of the Church in the fatherland of
the Cæsars. And he has already taken the first step in the execution of
this--shall I say madness or crime? Here is a contract with his
signature, which he concluded with Theodahad, the last of the barbarian
princes. Thereby the King sells, for the sum of one thousand pounds'
weight of gold, the government of the city and district of Rome, and of
thirty miles of country round, in case of Silverius becoming Bishop of
Rome, to St. Peter and his successors. All the prerogatives of royalty
are enumerated--jurisdiction, legislation, administration, customs,
taxes, and even military power. According to the date, this document is
three months old. Therefore, at the very moment that the pious
archdeacon, behind Theodahad's back, was summoning the Emperor's army,
he also, behind the Emperor's back, signed a contract which would rob
the latter of all the fruits of his efforts, and insure the Pope under
all circumstances. I leave it to the representative of the Emperor to
decide in what manner such wisdom should be appreciated. By the chosen
of the Lord the morals of the serpent are looked upon as high wisdom;
amongst us laymen such acts are----"

"The most shameful treachery!" thundered Belisarius, as he sprang from
his seat and took the document from the Prefect.

"Look here, priest, your name! Can you deny it?"

The impression made upon all present by this accusation and proof was
overpowering.

Suspicion and indignation, mixed with eager expectation of the Pope's
defence, was written upon each man's countenance; and Scævola, the
short-sighted republican, was the most taken by surprise at this
revelation of the ambitious plan of his dangerous colleague. He hoped
that Silverius would victoriously refute the calumny. The position of
the Pope was indeed highly dangerous; the accusation appeared to be
undeniable, and the angry countenance of Belisarius would have
intimidated many a bolder heart.

But Silverius showed that he wag no unworthy adversary of the Prefect
and the hero of Byzantium.

He had not lost his presence of mind for a moment; only when Cethegus
had taken the document from the folds of his dress, had he closed his
eyes as if in pain. But he met the thundering voice and flashing eyes
of Belisarius with a composed and steady countenance.

He felt that he must now fight for the ideal of his life, and this
feeling nerved him; not a muscle of his face twitched.

"How long will you keep me waiting?" asked Belisarius angrily.

"Until you are capable and worthy of listening to me. You are possessed
by Urchitophel, the demon of anger."

"Speak! Defend yourself!" cried Belisarius, reseating himself.

"The accusation of this godless man," began Silverius, "only asserts,
sooner than I had intended, a right of the Holy Church, which I did not
wish to insist upon during these unquiet times. It is true that I
concluded this contract with the barbarian King."

A movement of indignation escaped the Byzantines present.

"Not from love of worldly power, not to acquire any new privileges, did
I treat with the King of the Goths, at that time master of this
country. No! the saints be my witness! I did it merely because it was
my duty to prevent the lapse of an ancient right of the Church."

"An ancient right?" asked Belisarius impatiently.

"An ancient right!" repeated Silverius, "which the Church has neglected
to assert until now. Her enemies oblige her to declare it at this
moment. Know then, representative of the Emperor! hear it, generals and
soldiers! that which the Church demanded of Theodahad has been her
right for two centuries; the Goth only confirmed it. In the same place
whence the Prefect, with sacrilegious hand, took this document, he
might also have found that which originally established our right. The
pious Emperor Constantinus--who, first of all the predecessors of
Justinian, received the teaching of the Gospel--moved by the prayers of
his blessed mother, Helena, and after having trampled his enemies under
foot by the help of the saints, and particularly by that of St. Peter,
did, in thankful acknowledgment of such help, and to prove to all the
world that crown and sword should bow before the Cross of Christ,
bestow the city of Rome and its district, with all the neighbouring
towns and their boundaries, with jurisdiction and police, taxes and
duties, and all the royal prerogatives of earthly government, upon St.
Peter and his successors for all time, so that his Church might have a
secular foundation for the furtherance of her secular tasks. This
donation is conferred in all form by a legal document; the curse of
Gehenna is laid upon all who dispute it. And I ask the Emperor
Justinian, in the name of the Trinity, whether he will acknowledge this
legal act of his predecessor, the blessed Emperor Constantinus, or if,
in worldly avarice, he will overthrow it, and thereby call down upon
his head the curse of Gehenna and eternal damnation?"

This speech of the Bishop of Rome, spoken with all the power of
ecclesiastical dignity and all the art of worldly rhetoric, was of
irresistible effect.

Belisarius, Procopius, and the generals, who, a moment before, would
willingly have passed an angry judgment upon the treacherous priest,
now felt as if they themselves were judged. The heart of Italy seemed
to be irrecoverably lost to the Emperor, and delivered into the power
of the Church.

An anxious silence overcame the lately so masterful Byzantines, and the
priest stood triumphantly as victor in their midst.

At last Belisarius, who wished to avoid a dispute and the shame of
defeat, said:

"Prefect of Rome, what have you to reply?"

With a scarcely visible quiver of mockery upon his fine lips, Cethegus
bowed and began:

"The accused refers to a document. I believe I could embarrass him
greatly if I denied its existence, and demanded the immediate
production of the original. However, I will not meet the man who calls
himself the head of Christendom, with the wiles of a spiteful advocate.
I admit that the document exists."

Belisarius made a movement of helpless vexation.

"Still more! I have saved the Holy Father the trouble of producing it,
which would have been very difficult for him to do, and have brought
the document itself with my own sacrilegious hands."

He drew forth a yellow old parchment from his bosom, and looked
smilingly now at the lines thereon, now at the Pope, and now at
Belisarius, evidently enjoying their suspense.

"Yes, still more! I have examined the document for many days with
hostile eyes, and, with the help of still greater jurists than I can
boast of being--such as my young friend, Salvius Julianus--have tried
to invalidate every letter. In vain. Even the penetration of my learned
and honourable friend, Scævola, could have found no flaw. All legal
forms, all the clauses in the act of donation, are sharply defined with
indisputable accuracy; and indeed I should like to have been acquainted
with the protonotary of Emperor Constantinus, for he must have been a
jurist of the first rank."

He paused--his eyes rested sarcastically upon the countenance of
Silverius, who wiped the sweat off his brow.

"Therefore," asked Belisarius, in great excitement, "the document is
formally quite correct, and can be proved?"

"Yes, certainly," sighed Cethegus, "the act of donation is faultlessly
drawn up. It is only a pity that----"



"Well!" interrupted Belisarius.

"It is only a pity that it is false."

A general cry arose. Belisarius and Antonina sprang from their seats;
all present pressed nearer to Cethegus. Silverius alone fell back a
step.

"False!" cried Belisarius in a tone that sounded like a shout of joy.
"Prefect--friend--can you prove that?"

"I should otherwise have taken care not to assert it. The parchment
upon which the act of donation is written shows all the signs of great
age: worm-eaten, cracked, spots of every kind--everything that one can
expect from such an ancient document, so that, sometimes, it is
difficult to decipher the letters. Notwithstanding, the document only
_appears_ to be old; with as much art as many women employ to give
themselves the appearance of youth does it ape the sanctity of great
age. It is real parchment from the old and still existing parchment
manufactory at Byzantium, founded by Constantinus."

"Keep to the matter!" cried Belisarius.

"But it is not known to every one--and it appears, unfortunately for
him, to have escaped the notice of the Bishop--that these parchments,
on the lower edge to the left, are always marked with the stamp of the
year of their manufacture, by the names of the then consuls, in,
certainly, almost invisible characters. Now pay attention, general. The
document pretends, as it says in the text, to have been prepared in the
sixteenth year of the reign of Constantinus, the same year that he
closed the heathen temples, as the pious document observes, and a year
after the naming of Constantinopolis as the capital city; and it
rightly names the right consuls of that year, Dalmatius and Xenophilos.
Now it can only be explained by a miracle--but in this case it would be
a miracle _against_ the Church--that, in that year, therefore in the
year three hundred and thirty-five after the birth of Christ, it was
already known who would be consul in the year after the death of
Emperor Justinus and King Theodoric; for look, here on the lower edge
the stamp says--the writer had not noticed it--it is really very
difficult to make out, unless one holds the parchment against the
lights so--do you see, Belisarius?--and had blindly painted the cross
upon it; but I, with my--what did he call it?--sacrilegious, but
clever, hand have wiped it off; do you see? there stand stamped the
words, 'VI. Indiction: Justinianus Augustus, sole consul in the first
year of his reign.'"

Silverius staggered, and was obliged to support himself by the chair
which had been placed for him.

"The parchment of the document," continued Cethegus, "upon which the
protonotary of Emperor Constantinus had written down the act of
donation two hundred years ago, has therefore been taken from the ribs
of an ass only a year ago at Byzantium! Confess, O general, that the
reign of the conceivable ends here and the supernatural begins; that
here a miracle has happened; and revere the mysterious ways of Heaven."

He gave the document to Belisarius.

"This is also a famous piece of history, holy and profane, which we are
now experiencing," said Procopius aside.

"It is so, by the slumber of Justinian!" cried Belisarius. "Bishop of
Rome, what have you to say?"

Silverius had with difficulty composed himself.

He saw the edifice which he had been constructing his whole life, sink
into the ground before him.

With a voice half choked by despair, he answered:

"I found the document in the archives of the Church a few months ago.
If it is as you say, I have been deceived as well as you."

"But we are not deceived," said Cethegus, smiling.

"I knew nothing of that stamp, I swear it by the wounds of Christ!"

"I believe it without an oath. Holy Father," interposed Cethegus.

"You will acknowledge, priest," said Belisarius, "that the strictest
examination into this affair----"

"I demand it as my right," cried Silverius.

"You shall have it, doubt it not! But I will not venture to judge in
this case. Only the wisdom of Emperor Justinian himself can here decide
upon what is right. Vulkaris, my faithful Herulian! I herewith deliver
into your keeping the person of the Bishop of Some. You will at once
take him on board a vessel, and conduct him to Byzantium!"

"I put in a protest!" cried Silverius. "No one on earth can try me but
a council of the orthodox Church. I demand to be taken to Rome."

"Rome you will never see again. And Emperor Justinian, who is justice
itself, will decide upon your protest with Trebonianus. But I think
your companions, Scævola and Albinus, the false accusers of the Prefect
(who has proved himself to be the best and warmest friend of the
Emperor), highly suspicious. Let Justinian decide how far they are
innocent. Take them too, Vulkaris, take them in chains to Byzantium. By
sea. Now take them out by the back door of the tent, not through the
camp. Vulkaris, this priest is the Emperor's _worst_ enemy. You will
answer for him with your head!"

"I will answer for him," said the gigantic Herulian, coming forward and
laying his mailed hand upon the Bishop's shoulder.--"Away with you,
priest! On board! He shall die, ere I will let him escape."

Silverius saw that further resistance would only excite compulsion
dangerous to his dignity. He submitted, and walked beside the German,
who did not withdraw his hand, towards the door in the back of the
tent, which was opened by a sentry.

The Bishop was obliged to pass close to Cethegus. He lowered his head
and did not look at him, but he heard a voice whisper:

"Silverius, this moment repays me for your victory in the Catacombs.
Now we are quits!"



                              CHAPTER XII.

As soon as the Bishop had left the tent, Belisarius rose eagerly from
his seat, hurried to the Prefect, and embraced him.

"Accept my thanks, Cethegus Cæsarius! Your reward will not be wanting.
I will tell the Emperor that for him you have to-day saved Rome."

But Cethegus smiled.

"My acts reward themselves."

The intellectual struggle, the rapid alternation of anger, fear,
anxiety, and triumph had exhausted the hero Belisarius more than half a
day of battle. He longed for rest and refreshment, and dismissed his
generals, none of whom left the tent without speaking a word of
acknowledgment to the Prefect.

The latter saw that his superiority was felt by all, even by
Belisarius. It pleased him that, in one and the same hour, he had
ruined the scheming Bishop and humbled the proud Byzantines.

But he did not idly revel in the feeling of victory. He knew the danger
of sleeping upon laurels; laurel stupefies.

He decided to follow up his victory, to use at once the intellectual
superiority over the hero of Byzantium which he undoubtedly possessed
at this moment, and to strike his long-prepared and principal blow.

As, full of this thought, he was looking after the generals who were
just leaving the tent, he did not notice that two eyes were fixed upon
him with a peculiar expression.

They were the eyes of Antonina.

The incidents which she had just witnessed had produced a strangely
mixed impression on her mind. For the first time in her life she had
seen her idol, her husband, entangled in the nets of a priest without
the least power to extricate or help himself, and saved only by the
superior strength of this terrible Roman.

At first the shock to her pride in her husband had filled her with
dislike of the victor. But this feeling did not last, and
involuntarily, as the great superiority of Cethegus unfolded itself
before her, admiration took the place of vexation. She felt only one
thing: Belisarius had eclipsed the Church, and Cethegus had eclipsed
Belisarius. To this feeling was added the anxious desire that this man
might never become the enemy, but always remain the ally of her
husband.

In short, Cethegus had made a serious intellectual conquest of the wife
of Belisarius; and not only that, but he was at once made aware of it.

The beautiful and usually so confident woman came towards him with
downcast eyes. He looked up; she blushed violently and offered him a
trembling hand.

"Prefect of Rome," she said, "Antonina thanks you. You have rendered
great services to Belisarius and the Emperor. We will be good friends."

Procopius, who had remained in the tent, beheld this proceeding with
astonishment.

"My Odysseus out-charms the sorceress Circe," he thought.

But Cethegus saw in a moment that the soul of Antonina humbled itself
before him, and what power he thus gained over Belisarius.

"Beautiful _magistra militum_," he said, drawing himself up, "your
friendship is the proudest laurel in my wreath of victory. I will at
once put it to the proof. I beg you and Procopius to be my witnesses,
my allies, in the conversation which I must now hold with Belisarius."

"Now?" asked Belisarius impatiently. "Come, let us first to table, and
celebrate the fall of the priest in fiery Cæcubian."

And he walked towards the door.

But Cethegus remained quietly standing in the middle of the tent, and
Antonina and Procopius were so completely under his influence, that
they did not dare to follow their master.

Even Belisarius turned and asked:

"Must it absolutely take place now?"

"It must," said Cethegus, and he took Antonina's hand and led her back
to her seat.

Then Belisarius also retraced his steps.

"Well," he said, "speak; but briefly. As briefly as possible."

"I have ever found," began Cethegus, "that with great friends or great
enemies, sincerity is the strongest bond and the best weapon. According
to this maxim I will act. When I said my acts reward themselves, I
wished to express thereby that I did not wrest the mastery of Rome from
the false priest exactly for the sake of the Emperor."

Belisarius grew attentive.

Procopius, alarmed at the too bold sincerity of his friend, made a sign
of warning.

Antonina's quick eye remarked it, and she started; the intelligence
between the two men aroused her suspicion.

This did not escape Cethegus.

"No, Procopius," he said, to the astonishment of Belisarius; "our
friends here will far too soon acknowledge that Cethegus is not a man
whose ambition can be satisfied by a smile from Justinian. I have not
saved Rome for the Emperor."

"For whom else!" asked Belisarius gravely.

"First for Rome herself. I am a Roman. I love my Eternal City. She
shall not become the servant of the priests, but also not the slave of
the Emperor. I am a republican," he said, tossing his head defiantly.

A smile passed across the countenance of Belisarius; the Prefect seemed
to him of less importance than before.

Procopius, shrugging his shoulders, said:

"Incomprehensible!"

But this candour pleased Antonina.

"I certainly saw," continued Cethegus, "that we could only beat the
barbarians by the sword of Belisarius. And also, alas! that the time is
not ripe to realise my dreams of republican freedom. The Romans must
first again become Catos; this generation must die out; and I
acknowledge that, meantime, Rome can only find protection against the
barbarians under the shield of Justinian. Therefore we will bow to this
shield--for the present."


"Not bad!" thought Procopius; "the Emperor is to protect them until
they are strong enough to run away from him, in proof of gratitude."

"These are but dreams, my Prefect," said Belisarius compassionately.
"What practical results can they have?"

"These: that Rome shall not be delivered up to the caprice of the
Emperor with bound hands and without conditions. Belisarius is not the
only servant of Justinian. Only think, if the heartless Narses were to
become your successor!" The hero frowned. "Therefore I will tell you
the conditions under which the city of Cæsar will open her gates to you
and your army."

But this was too much for Belisarius.

He sprang up in a rage; his face glowed; his eyes flashed.

"Prefect of Rome," he cried in his loudest voice, "you forget yourself
and your position! To-morrow I start with my army of seventy thousand
men for Rome. Who will hinder me from entering the city without
conditions?"

"I," said Cethegus quietly. "No, Belisarius, I do not rave. Look at
this plan of the city and its fortifications. Your experienced eye will
recognise its strength better and more quickly than mine."

He drew forth a parchment and spread it open upon the table.

Belisarius cast an indifferent look at it, but immediately cried out:

"The plan is incorrect! Procopius, give me our plan out of that
casket.--Look here, those moats are now filled up; those towers are
ruined; the wall here is broken down, those gates defenceless.--Your
plan represents them as of terrible strength. It is obsolete, Prefect
of Rome!"

"No, Belisarius, _yours_ is obsolete. These walls, moats, and gates are
reconstructed."

"Since when?"

"A year ago."

"By whom?"

"By me."

Belisarius looked at the plan in perplexity.

Antonina's eyes rested anxiously on the features of her husband.

"Prefect," he said at last, "if this be so, you understand warfare
well--the warfare of fortresses. But to wage war there must be an army,
and your empty walls will not arrest my progress."

"You will not find them empty. You must acknowledge that a force of
more than twenty thousand men is capable of holding Rome--namely, this
my Rome upon the plan--for days and years, even against Belisarius.
Good. Then, know that these fortifications are held by thirty-five
thousand armed men."

"Have the Goths returned?" asked Belisarius.

Procopius drew nearer, astonished.

"No; these thirty-five thousand men are under my command. For some
years I have recalled the long enervated Romans to arms, and have
unceasingly practised them in the use of their weapons. So at present I
have thirty cohorts ready for battle, each consisting of almost a
thousand men."


Belisarius struggled to repress his vexation, and shrugged his
shoulders contemptuously.

"I acknowledge," continued Cethegus, "that these troops could not
oppose the army of Belisarius in the open field. But I assure you that
they will fight famously behind these walls. Besides that, I have, out
of my private means, enrolled seven thousand picked Isaurian and
Abasgian mercenaries, and have brought them, gradually and unobserved,
in small divisions to Ostia, Rome, and the neighbourhood. You doubt it?
Here are the lists of the thirty cohorts, and the contract with the
Isaurians. You now see distinctly how matters stand. Either you
accept my conditions--and then these thirty-five thousands are yours:
yours is Rome, my Rome, this Rome on the plan, of which you say that it
is of fearful strength, and yours is Cethegus--or you refuse my
conditions.--Then your victorious march, whose success depends on the
rapidity of your movements, is arrested. You will be obliged to besiege
Rome for many months. The Goths will have plenty of time to re-collect
their forces. We ourselves will call them back. They will come to
relieve the city in threefold superiority, and nothing can save you
from destruction but a miracle!"

"Or your death at this moment! thou devil!" thundered Belisarius, and,
no longer master of himself, he drew his sword.

"Up, Procopius, in the Emperor's name! Take the traitor! He dies in
this hour!"

Horrified and undecided, Procopius rushed between the two men, while
Antonina caught her husband's arm, and tried to take his right hand.

"Are you his allies!" cried Belisarius furiously.

"Guards! guards! here!"


From each of the two doors two lancers entered the tent.

But Belisarius had already torn himself from Antonina's hold, and had
hurled Procopius to one side as if he were a child. Raising his sword,
he rushed at the Prefect. But he suddenly stopped short and lowered his
weapon, the point of which already touched the breast of Cethegus; for,
immovable, like a statue, without the least change of countenance, and
fixing his cold eyes penetratingly upon his furious assailer, Cethegus
had remained standing, a smile of unspeakable contempt upon his lips.

"What means this look and smile?" asked Belisarius.

Procopius quietly signed to the guards to leave the tent.

"Pity for your reputation, which a moment of rage might destroy for
ever. If you had killed me, you would have been lost!"

"I!" laughed Belisarius; "I should think _you_ would have been lost."

"And you with me. Do you believe that I put my head into the lion's
mouth like a fool? It was not difficult to foresee that a hero of your
sort would first of all try to put an end to his embarrassment with his
sword. Against this I have protected myself. Know that since this
morning, in consequence of a sealed order which I left behind me, Rome
is in the hands of my blindly-devoted friends. The Mausoleum of
Hadrian, the Capitol, and all the gates and towers of the ramparts,
are garrisoned by Isaurians and legionaries. I left the order with my
war-tribunes, who are youths fearless of death, in case of your
reaching Rome before me."

He handed a roll of papyrus to Procopius.

Procopius read: "To Lucius and Marcus, the Licinii, Cethegus the
Prefect. I have fallen a victim to the tyranny of the Byzantines.
Revenge me! Recall the Goths at once. I demand it of you by your oath.
Better the barbarians than the police of Justinian. Hold out to the
last man! Rather give the city to the flames than to the army of the
tyrant!'"

"So you see," continued Cethegus, "that my death will not open to you
the gates of Rome, but shut them upon you for ever. You must besiege
the city, or agree with me."

Belisarius cast a look of anger, not unmixed with admiration, at the
bold man who put conditions to him in the midst of his thousands.

Then he sheathed his sword, threw himself impatiently upon his stool,
and asked:

"What are your conditions for the surrender?"

"Only two. First, you will give me the command of a small part of your
army. I must be no stranger to your Byzantines."

"Granted. You will have under your command two thousand Illyrian
footmen and one thousand Saracen and Moorish horsemen. Is that
sufficient?"

"Perfectly. Secondly, my independence rests entirely upon my dominion
of Rome. This must not cease during your presence. Therefore, the whole
right shore of the Tiber, with the Mausoleum of Hadrian; and on the
left the Capitol, including the walls on the south as far as the Gate
of St. Peter, must remain, until the end of the war, in the hands of my
Romans and Isaurians. The rest of the city on the left shore of the
Tiber, from the Flavian Amphitheatre in the north to the Appian Gate in
the south, will be occupied by you."

Belisarius cast a glance at the plan.

"Not badly arranged! From those points you can at any moment drive me
out of the city or blockade the river. That will not do!"

"Then prepare for a fight with the Goths and Cethegus together before
the walls of Rome!"

Belisarius sprang from his seat.

"Go! leave me alone with Procopius, Cethegus. Wait for my decision."

"Till to-morrow!" cried Cethegus. "At sunrise I return to Rome, either
with your army or--alone."

A few days later Belisarius, with his army, entered the Eternal City
through the Asinarian Gate.

Endless acclamation greeted the liberator; a rain of flowers covered
him and his wife, who rode at his left hand on a beautiful palfrey.

All the houses were decorated with gay draperies and wreaths. Bat the
object of these rejoicings did not appear happy; he gloomily bent his
head, and cast dark looks at the walls and the Capitol, from which
floated, not the dragon flags of Byzantium, but the banners and ensigns
of the municipal legions, formed after the model of the Roman eagles
and standards.

At the Asinarian Gate young Lucius Licinius had sent back the vanguard
of the imperial army, and the heavy portcullis did not rise until, at
the side of Belisarius on his bay horse, appeared Cethegus the Prefect,
mounted on his splendid charger.

Lucius was astonished at the change which had taken place in his
admired friend.

The Prefect's cold and severe reserve seemed to have disappeared; he
looked taller, younger; the glory of victory illumined his features. He
wore a richly-gilded helmet, from which the crimson mane flowed down to
his mail-coat. This last was a costly work of art from Athens, and
showed upon every one of its round plates a finely-worked relief in
chased silver, each representing a victory of the Romans. The
victorious expression of his beaming face, his proud carriage, and
scintillating armour, outshone Belisarius, the imperial magister
militum himself, and all his glittering staff, which, led by Johannes
and Procopius, followed close behind.

And this superiority was so striking, that by the time the procession
had passed through several streets, the impression was shared by the
mob, and the cry, "Cethegus!" was soon heard more loudly and frequently
than the name of "Belisarius!"

Antonina's fine ear soon began to remark this circumstance; she
listened uneasily at every pause of the procession to the cries and
remarks of the by-standers.

When they had left the Thermæ of Titus behind them, and had reached the
Via Sacra, near the Flavian Amphitheatre, they were obliged to stop on
account of the crowd. A narrow triumphal arch had been erected here,
which could only be passed at a slow pace. "Victory, to the Emperor
Justinian and his general, Belisarius," was inscribed thereon.

As Antonina was reading this inscription, she heard an old man, who
appeared to be but scantily initiated into the course of events,
questioning his son, one of the legionaries of Cethegus.

"Then, my Gazus, the gloomy man with the angry-looking face, on the bay
horse----"

"Yes, that is Belisarius, as I told you."

"Indeed? Well--then the stately hero on his left hand, with the
triumphant look--he on the charger, must be his master, the Emperor
Justinian."

"Not at all, father. _He_ sits quietly in his golden palace at
Byzantium and writes laws. No; that is Cethegus, _our_ Cethegus, _my_
Cethegus, the Prefect, who gave me my sword. Yes, that _is_ a man!
Lucius, my tribune, said lately, 'If he did not allow it, Belisarius
would never see a Roman Gate from the inside.'"

Antonina gave her grey palfrey a smart stroke with her silver rod, and
galloped quickly through the triumphal arch.

Cethegus accompanied the commander-in-chief and his wife to the Pincian
Palace, which had been sumptuously prepared for their reception.

Then he took leave, in order to assist the Byzantine generals in
quartering the troops, partly on the citizens; partly in the public
buildings, and partly before the gates of the city in tents.

"When you have recovered from the fatigues and honours of the day,
Belisarius, I shall expect you and Antonina, with your staff, at a
banquet in my house," he had said before leaving them.

After some hours, Marcus Licinius, Piso, and Balbus appeared to fetch
the invited guests.

They accompanied the litters in which Antonina and Belisarius were
carried. The generals went on foot.

"Where does the Prefect live?" asked Belisarius, as he entered his
litter.

"As long as you are here, by day in the Mausoleum of Hadrian, by night
in the Capitol."

Belisarius started.

The little procession approached the Capitol.

The commander-in-chief saw with astonishment all the walls and works,
which had lain in ruins for more than two centuries, restored to
immense strength.

When they had wound their way through the long, dark, and zigzag
passage which led into the fortress, they arrived at a massive iron
door, which was fast shut, as if in time of war.

Marcus Licinius called to the sentinel.

"Give the watch-word!" cried a voice from within.

"Cæsar and Cethegus!" answered the war-tribune. Then the wings of the
door sprang open; a long lane formed by Roman legionaries and Isaurian
mercenaries became visible, the last clad in iron up to their very
eyes, and armed with double-bladed battle-axes.

Lucius Licinius stood at the head of the Romans with drawn sword;
Sandil, the Isaurian chief, at the head of his countrymen.

For one moment the Byzantines hesitated, overpowered by the impression
of this display of granite and iron.

Suddenly the faintly-illumined space became bright with light, and,
accompanied by torch-bearers and flute-players, without armour, a
wreath upon his brow, such as was generally worn by the giver of a
feast, and dressed in a magnificent indoor garment of purple silk,
appeared Cethegus.

He came forward smiling, and said:

"Welcome! Let flutes and trumpets loudly proclaim that the happiest
hour of my life has arrived--Belisarius is _my_ guest in the Capitol!"

And, amid a tremendous flourish of trumpets, he led his silent guests
into the fortress.



                             CHAPTER XIII.

During these occurrences among the Romans and Byzantines, decisive
events were in preparation on the part of the Goths.

Duke Guntharis and Earl Arahad, leaving a small garrison behind them,
and taking their Queen with them as prisoner, had left Florentia and
gone, by forced marches to Ravenna.

If they could reach and win this fortress, which was considered
impregnable, before Witichis, who pressed forward after them, they
would be able to make any conditions with the King.

They had a capital start, and hoped that their enemies would be stopped
for some time before Florentia. But they lost almost all the advantages
of their start; for the towns and castles bordering the nearest road to
Ravenna had declared for Witichis, and this circumstance obliged the
rebels to take a circuitous route northwards to Bononia (Bologna),
whose inhabitants had embraced their cause, and thence march eastwards
to Ravenna.

Notwithstanding this delay, when they reached the marshy land
surrounding that fortified city, and were only half a day's march from
its gates, nothing could be seen of the King's army.

Guntharis allowed his greatly-fatigued troops to rest for the remainder
of the day, which was already drawing to a close, and sent a small
troop of horsemen under the command of his brother, to announce their
arrival to the Goths in the fortress.

But at dawn the next day Earl Arahad came flying back into the camp
with a greatly diminished troop.

"By the sword of God!" exclaimed Guntharis, "whence comest thou?"

"We come from Ravenna. We reached the outermost ramparts of the city
and demanded admittance; but were roughly repulsed, although I showed
myself and called for old Grippa the commander. He insolently declared
that to-morrow we should learn the decision of the city; we, as well as
the army of the King, whose vanguard is already approaching the city
from the south-east."

"Impossible!" cried Guntharis angrily. "I could do nothing but withdraw,
although I could not understand the behaviour of our friend. Besides, I
held the report of the approach of the King to be an empty threat,
until some of my horsemen, who were seeking for a dry place on which to
bivouac, were suddenly attacked by a troop of the enemy under the
command of Earl Teja, with the cry, 'Hail, King Witichis!' After a
sharp combat they were worsted."

"Thou ravest!" cried Guntharis. "Have they wings? Has Florentia been
blown away out of their path?"

"No! but I learned from Picentinian peasants that Witichis marched to
Ravenna by the coast-road, past Auximum and Ariminum."

"And he left Florentia in his rear unconquered? He shall repent of
that!"

"Florentia has fallen! He sent Hildebad against it, who took it by
storm. He broke in the Gate of Mars with his own hand, the furious
bull!"

Duke Guntharis listened to these evil tidings with a gloomy face; but
he quickly came to a decision.

He at once set forth with all his troops, intending to take the city of
Ravenna by surprise.

His attack failed.

But the rebels had the consolation of seeing that the fortress, whose
possession would determine the result of the civil war, had at least
refused to open its gates to the enemy.

The King had encamped to the south-east, before the harbour town of
Classis.

Duke Guntharis's experienced eye soon perceived that the marshes on the
north-west would also afford a secure position, and there he shortly
afterwards pitched his well-protected camp.

So the rival parties, like two impetuous lovers of a coy maiden,
pressed from opposite sides upon the royal residence, which seemed
disinclined to lend an ear to either.

The day following two embassies, consisting of Ravennese and Goths,
issued from the Gates of Honorius and of Theodoric, on the north-west
and south-east, and brought to the camp of the rebels, as well as to
that of the King, the fateful decision of the city.

This decision must have been a strange one.

For the two commanders, Guntharis and Witichis, kept it, in singular
conformity, strictly secret, and took great care that not a word should
become known to their troops.

The ambassadors were immediately conducted from the tents of the
commanders of either camp to the very gates of the fortress, escorted
by generals who forbade any communication with the troops.

And in other ways the effect of the embassy in both camps was singular
enough.

In the rebel camp it led to a violent altercation between the two
brothers, and afterwards to a very animated interview between Duke
Guntharis and his fair prisoner, who, it was said, had only been saved
from his rage by the intervention of Earl Arahad. Finally, the rebel
camp sank into the repose of helpless indecision.

More important consequences ensued in the opposite camp. The first
answer which King Witichis gave the embassy was the order for a general
attack upon the city.

Hildebrand and Teja and the whole army received this order with
astonishment. They had hoped that the strong fortress would voluntarily
open its gates.

Contrary to all Gothic custom and his own usually frank manner, King
Witichis imparted to no one, not even to his friends, the object of the
embassy, or the reason of his angry attack.

Silently, but with doubting shakes of the head and little hope of
success, the army prepared for the assault.

They were repulsed with great loss.

In vain the King urged his Goths again and again to storm the
precipitous and rocky walls.

In vain he himself was the first, three several times, to climb the
scaling-ladders. From early morning to sunset the assaulters stormed
the place without making the least progress; the fortress well
preserved its old reputation of invincibility.

And when at last the King, stunned by a stone, was carried out of the
turmoil, Teja and Hildebrand ceased their efforts and led the weary
troops back to the camp.

The temper of the army during the following night was very sad and
depressed. They had to complain of great losses, and had now nothing
but the conviction that the city could not be taken by force.

The Gothic garrison of Ravenna had fought side by side with the
citizens on the walls. The King of the Goths lay encamped before his
own residence, before the stronghold of his kingdom, in which he had
hoped to find protection and the time to arm against Belisarius!

But the worst was, that the army laid the whole blame of the unhappy
struggle and the necessity of civil war upon the King. Why had the
negotiations with the city been so abruptly broken off? Why was not the
cause of this breach, if it were a just one, made known to the troops?
Why did the King shun the light?

The soldiers sat dejected by their watch-fires, or lay in their tents
nursing their wounds and mending their weapons; no ancient heroic songs
sounded, as usual, from the mess-tables of the camp; and when the
leaders walked through the lanes of tents, they heard many a word of
anger and vexation directed against the King.

Towards morning Hildebad arrived in the camp from Florentia with his
thousands. He heard with indignation of the news of the bloody defeat,
and wished to go at once to the King; but as the latter still lay
unconscious under Hildebrand's care. Earl Teja took Hildebad into his
tent to answer his impatient questions.

Some time after the old master-at-arms joined them; with such an
expression on his features that Hildebad sprang affrighted from the
bear-skin which served him for a couch, and even Teja asked hastily:

"How is the King? What of his wound? Is he dying?"

The old man shook his head sadly.

"No; but if I guess rightly, judging him by his honest heart, it would
be far better for him to die."

"What meanest thou? What dost thou suspect?"

"Peace, peace," said Hildebrand sadly, and seating himself, "poor
Witichis! it will be spoken of soon enough, I fear."

And he was silent.

"Well," said Teja, "how didst thou leave him?"

"The fever has left him, thanks to my herbs. He will be able to mount
his horse to-morrow. But he spoke of strange things in his confused
dreams--I hope that they are but dreams--else, woe to the faithful
man!"

Nothing more could be got out of the taciturn old man.

Some hours after, Witichis sent for the three leaders. To their
astonishment, they found him in full armour, although he was obliged,
while standing, to support himself on his sword. On a table near him
lay his crown-shaped helmet and a sceptre of white ivory, surmounted
with a golden ball.

The friends were startled by the impaired look of his usually so
composed, handsome, and manly features.

He must have gone through some fearful inward struggle. His sound,
simple nature, which seemed to be all of one piece, could not endure
the strife of doubtful duties and contradictory feelings.

"I have summoned you," he said with great effort, "to hear and support
my decision in our grave position. How heavy have been our losses in
this attack?"

"Three thousand dead," said Earl Teja, very gravely.

"And about six thousand wounded," added Hildebrand.

Witichis closed his eyes as if in pain. Then he said:

"It cannot be helped, Teja. Give at once the command for a second
attack!"

"How! what!" cried the three leaders like one man.

"It cannot be helped," repeated the King. "How many thousands hast thou
brought us, Hildebad?"

"Three; but they are dead tired from the march. They cannot fight
to-day."

"Then we will storm alone again," said Witichis, taking his spear.

"King," said Teja, "we did not win a single stone of the fortress
yesterday, and to-day we have nine thousand men less----"

"And those not wounded are faint, their weapons and their courage
broken."

"We _must_ have Ravenna!" repeated Witichis.

"We shall never take it by force," said Earl Teja.

"We will see about that!" retorted Witichis.

"I besieged the city with the great King," said Hildebrand warningly.
"He stormed it in vain seventy times. We only took it by starving
it--after three years."

"We must attack!" cried Witichis. "Give the command."

Teja was about to leave the tent.

Hildebrand stopped him.

"Remain," he said; "we dare not hide it from him any longer. King! the
Goths murmur. To-day they would not obey thee; the attack is
impossible."

"Stand things so?" said Witichis bitterly. "The attack is impossible?
Then only one thing remains: the course which I should have taken
yesterday--then those three thousand would have been still living. Go,
Hildebad, take that crown and sceptre! Go to the rebels' camp; lay them
at the feet of young Arahad; tell him that he may woo Mataswintha; I
and my army will greet him as our King."

And, so speaking, he threw himself exhausted upon his couch.

"Thou speakest feverishly again," cried Hildebrand.

"That is impossible!" cried Teja.

"Impossible!" repeated Witichis. "Everything is impossible? The fight
impossible? and the renunciation? I tell thee, old man, there is
nothing else to be done, after that message from Ravenna."

He ceased.

His three companions looked at each other significantly.

At last the old man said:

"What was that message? Perhaps an expedient may be found? Eight eyes
see more than two."

"No," said Witichis, "not in this case. Here there is nothing to see,
otherwise I would have asked your advice long since. But it could have
led to nothing. There lies the parchment from Ravenna; but be silent
before the army."

The old man took the roll and read:

"'The Gothic warriors and the citizens of Ravenna, to Earl Witichis of
Fæsulæ----'"

"What insolence!" cried Hildebad.

"'And to Duke Guntharis of Florentia, and Earl Arahad of Asta. The
Goths and the citizens of this city declare to the two armies encamped
before their gates, that they, faithful to the distinguished House of
Amelung, and remembering the benefits of the great King Theodoric, will
firmly cling to his royal line as long as a scion of it lives.
Therefore we acknowledge Mataswintha as sole mistress of the Goths and
Italians; only to her will we open our gates, and we will defend them
against any other to the utmost.'"

"What madness!" said Earl Teja.

"Incomprehensible!" cried Hildebad.

But Hildebrand folded the parchment and said:

"I understand it very well. As to the Goths, you must know that the
garrison is formed of the followers of Theodoric, and these followers
have sworn to him never to prefer a strange king to one of his line. I,
too, swore this oath, but, in doing so, I ever thought of the spear and
not of the spindle. It was this oath which obliged me to adhere to
Theodahad, and only after his treachery was I free to do homage to
Witichis. But old Earl Grippa, of Ravenna, and his companions, believe
that they are equally bound to the females of the royal line. And, be
sure of it, these grey-headed heroes--the oldest in the nation, and
Theodoric's brothers-at-arms--will let themselves be hewn in pieces,
man for man, rather than break that oath as they understand it. And, by
Theodoric, they are right! But the Ravennese are not only grateful,
they are cunning; they hope that Goths and Byzantines will fight out
their affair before their walls. If Belisarius win--who, as he says,
comes to avenge Amalaswintha--he cannot then be angry with the city
which has remained faithful to her daughter; and if we win, then it was
they who obliged the garrison to close their gates."

"However that may be," interposed the King, "you will now understand my
silence. If the army knew the contents of that parchment, they might be
discouraged, and go over to the rebels, who hold the Princess in their
power. There remain to me only two courses: either to take the city by
storm--and that we tried yesterday in vain--or, to yield. You say the
first course cannot be repeated, so there only remains the last--to
yield. Arahad may woo the Princess and wear the crown; I will be the
first to do him homage and protect the kingdom, in concert with his
brave brother."

"Never!" cried Hildebad. "Thou art our King, and shall remain so. Never
will I bow my head to that young coxcomb! Let us march to-morrow
against the rebels; I alone will drive them out of their camp, and
carry the royal child--at the touch of whose hands those fast-shut
gates will fly open as if by magic--into _our_ tents."

"And when we have her," asked Earl Teja, "what then? She is of no use
to us if we do not make her our Queen. Wilt thou do so? Hast thou not
had enough with Amalaswintha and Gothelindis? Once more the rule of a
woman?"

"God forbid!" laughed Hildebad.

"I think so too," said the King, "otherwise I should have taken this
course long since."

"Well, then, let us remain here and wait until the city is wearied
out."

"It is impossible." said Witichis, "we cannot wait. In a few days
Belisarius may descend from yonder mountains and conquer us, Duke
Guntharis, and the city; then the kingdom and people of the Goths are
lost for ever! There are only two ways--to storm--"

"Impossible!' said Hildebrand.

"Or to yield. Go, Teja, take the crown. I see no other expedient."

The two young men hesitated.

Then old Hildebrand, with a sad and earnest and loving look at the
King, said:

"I know of another course to take; a painful, but the only one. Thou
must take this course, my Witichis, even if thy heart should break."

Witichis looked at him inquiringly. Even Teja and Hildebad were struck
by the tender manner of the old man.

"Go out," continued Hildebrand, turning to Hildebad and Teja. "I must
speak to the King alone."



                              CHAPTER XIV.

Silently the two Goths left the tent, and walked up and down, awaiting
the result.

From the tent they now and then heard Hildebrand's voice, who appeared
to warn and argue with the King; and now and then an outcry from the
latter.

"What can the old man be thinking of?" asked Hildebad, stopping in his
walk. "Dost thou not know?"

"I guess," sighed Teja; "poor Witichis!"

"What the devil dost thou mean?"

"Let me alone," said Teja; "it will all come out soon enough."

A considerable time elapsed thus. Ever more violent and more full of
pain sounded the voice of the King, who seemed to defend himself
desperately against Hildebrand's arguments.

"Why does the greybeard so torture the brave hero?" cried Hildebad
angrily. "It is just as if he would murder him! I will go in and help
him!"

But Teja held him fast by the shoulder.

"Remain!" he cried, "he cannot be helped."

As Hildebad was struggling to get loose, the noise of voices was heard
from the other end of the lane of tents; two sentries were trying in
vain to stop a strong Goth, who, covered with all the signs of a long
and hard ride, tried to get to the King's tent.

"Let me go, good friend," he cried, "or I will strike thee down!"

And he threateningly lifted a heavy club.

"It cannot be. Thou must wait. The leaders are with him in his tent."

"And if all the gods of Walhalla, together with the Lord Christ, were
in his tent, I must go to him!"

"I know that voice," cried Earl Teja, advancing, "and the man. Wachis!
what seekest thou here?"

"Oh, master!" cried the faithful servant, "happy am I to find you. Tell
these good folks to let me loose, then I need not knock them down."

"Let him loose, or he will keep his word. I know him. Well, what
wouldest thou then with the King?"

"Pray lead me to him at once. I have sad and terrible news to tell him
of his wife and child."

"Wife and child?" asked Hildebad in astonishment. "What, has he a
wife?"

"Very few know it," answered Teja. "She has scarcely ever left their
estate, and has never been to court. Scarcely any one knows her, but
all who do, honour her highly. I know no one like her."

"There you are right, master, if ever any one was!" said Wachis in a
suffocated voice. "The poor, poor mother! and, alas, the poor father!
But let me go. Mistress Rauthgundis follows close behind. I must
prepare him."

Earl Teja, without more questioning, pushed the man into the tent, and
followed with Hildebad.

They found old Hildebrand sitting calmly, like inevitable fate itself,
upon the King's couch, his chin resting on his hand, and his hand upon
his stone battle-axe.

Thus he sat immovable, fixing his eyes upon the King, who, in the
greatest excitement, was pacing to und fro with rapid steps, and so
absorbed in the terrible conflict of his soul, that he did not remark
those who entered.

"No, no; never!" he cried, "it is cruel! criminal! impossible!"

"It must be," said Hildebrand, without moving.

"No, I say!" cried the King; and turned.

Wachis was standing close before him.

Witichis looked at him wildly; then the servant threw himself at his
feet, weeping loudly.

"Wachis!" cried the King, in terror; "what is it? Thou comest from her?
Stand up--what has happened?"

"Alas! master," cried Wachis, still kneeling, "it breaks my heart to
see you! I could not help it. I have repaid and avenged with all my
might!"

Witichis pulled him up to his feet by the shoulders.

"Speak, man! What is there to revenge? My wife----"

"She lives, she is coming; but your child!"

"My child!" cried Witichis, turning pale, "Athalwin? What of him?"

"Dead, master--murdered!"

A cry as of one wounded to death broke from the tortured father's lips.
He covered his face with both hands; Teja and Hildebad stepped forward
compassionately. Only Hildebrand remained motionless, and looked
fixedly at the group.

Wachis could not bear the long and painful pause; he tried to take his
master's hands. They fell of their own accord; two great tears rolled
down the hero's brown cheeks; he was not ashamed of them.

"Murdered!" he cried, "my innocent child! By the Romans?" he asked.

"The cowardly devils!" cried Hildebad.

Teja clenched his fist, and his lips worked silently.

"Calpurnius?" asked Witichis, looking at Wachis.

"Yes, Calpurnius. The report of your election had reached the estate,
and your wife and child were summoned to the camp. How young Athalwin
rejoiced that he was now a King's son, like Siegfried who killed the
dragon! He said he would soon go to seek adventures, and also kill
dragons and giants. Just then our neighbour returned from Rome. I
noticed that he looked gloomy and more envious than ever, and I watched
well over house and stalls. But to watch the child--who could have
thought that children were no longer safe!"

Witichis shook his head sadly.

"The boy could hardly wait until he should see his father in the camp,
and all the thousands of Gothic warriors, and battles close at hand. He
threw away his wooden sword directly, and said a King's son must wear a
steel one, especially in time of war. And I was obliged to find a
hunting-knife, and sharpen it into the bargain. And with this famous
sword he escaped from Mistress Rauthgundis early every morning. And
when she asked, 'Whither?' he laughed, 'To seek adventures!' and sprang
into the woods. Then he came home at noon, tired out and with torn
clothes; wild with merriment and exultation. But he would not tell us
anything, and only hinted that he had played at being Siegfried. But
when I found spots of blood upon his sword, I crept after him into the
woods. It was exactly as I suspected. I had once shown him a hole in
some steep and rugged rocks, which hung over a running brook, and
warned him that there lay poisonous vipers by dozens. At that time he
had questioned me about everything, and when I said that every bite was
deadly, and that a poor berry-gatherer, who had been bitten by a snake
in her naked foot, had died immediately, he drew his wooden sword in a
minute, and wanted to jump into the hole. Much frightened, I with
difficulty kept him back. And now I remembered the vipers, and trembled
because I had given him a steel weapon. I soon found him in the wood in
the middle of the rocks, down among the thorns and brushwood. He was
just taking out a tremendous wooden shield which he had made for
himself and hidden there. A crown was freshly painted upon it. And he
drew his sword and sprang with a joyous cry into the hole. I looked
round. There lay strewn about dozens of the big snakes, with shattered
heads, the victims of his former battles. I followed the boy, and
though I was so anxious, I could not bear to disturb him as he stood
there fighting like a hero! He drove a swelling viper from her hole
with stones; she erected herself with hissing tongue, but just as she
darted at him, he threw his great shield before him and cut her in two
with a mighty stroke. Then I called him, and scolded him well. But he
looked very brave, bold, and disobedient, and cried, 'Do not tell my
mother, for I shall still do it. Until the last dragon is dead!' I said
I would take his sword away. Then I will fight with the wooden one, if
that please thee better,' he cried. 'And what a shame for a King's
son!' For the next few days I took him with me to catch the horses in
the uncultivated pastures. That pleased him very much; and shortly, I
thought, we shall go away. But one morning he escaped me again, and I
went alone to my work. I returned along the brook, sure that I should
find him among the rocks. But I did not find him. I found only the belt
of his sword lying torn on the thorns and his shield broken on the
ground. I looked round alarmed, and sought, but----"

"Quicker, go on!" cried the King.

"But?" asked Hildebad.

"But there was nothing else to be seen on the rocks. Then I noticed the
large footprints of a man in some soft sand. I followed them. They led
to a place where the rock fell steeply to the brook. I looked over, and
below----"

Witichis staggered.

"Alas! my poor master! There on the shore of the brook lay the little
figure! How I got down the rocks, I know not. I was below in an
instant. There he lay, cut and torn by the points of the rocks, his
little hand still holding fast his sword, his bright hair covered with
blood---"

"Cease!" cried Teja, laying his hand upon the man's shoulder, while
Hildebad grasped the poor father's hand, who sank groaning upon his
couch.

"My child, my sweet child! my wife!" he cried.

"I felt that the little heart still beat," continued Wachis; "water
from the brook brought him to his senses. He opened his eyes and
recognised me. 'Thou hast fallen down, my poor child?' I asked. 'No,'
he said, 'not fallen. I was thrown down.' I was horrified.
'Calpurnius,' he went on, 'suddenly came round the corner of the rocks,
as I was striking at the vipers. "Come with me," he said, "or I will
bind thee." "Bind me!" I cried, "my father is King of the Goths, and
thine also. Dare to touch me!" Then he got angry and struck at me with
his stick and came nearer; but I knew that near me our servants were
felling trees, and I cried for help and retreated to the edge of the
rock. He looked about him in terror, for the people must have heard me;
the strokes of their axes ceased. But suddenly he sprang forward,
cried, "Die, little viper!" and pushed me over the rock.'"

Teja bit his lips.

"Oh, the devil!" cried Hildebad.

And Witichis, with a cry of pain, tore his hand from Hildebad's grasp.

"Cut it short," said Teja.

"He lost his senses again," Wachis continued; "I carried him in my arms
home to his mother. Once again he opened his eyes while lying on her
lap. A greeting to you was his last breath."

"And my wife? Is she not desperate?"

"No, master; that she is not. She is of gold, but also of steel. When
the boy had closed his eyes, she silently pointed out of the window to
the right. I understood her. There stood the neighbour's house. And I
armed all your servants and led them there to take revenge. We laid the
murdered boy on your shield and bore him in our midst. And Rauthgundis
went with us, a sword in her hand, following the corpse. We laid the
boy down before the gates of the villa. Calpurnius had fled on his
swiftest horse to Belisarius. But his brother and his son and twenty
slaves stood in the courtyard. They were just about to mount and follow
him. We uplifted the cry of murder three times. Then we attacked them.
We killed them _all_, _all_, and burnt the house down over the
inhabitants. Meantime Rauthgundis looked on without a word, keeping
watch by the little corpse and leaning on her sword; and the next day
she sent me on beforehand to tell you. Shortly after, as soon as she
had burnt the little corpse, she followed me. And as I have lost a day,
being hindered by the rebels from taking the shortest road, she may
arrive at any hour."'

"My child, my child! my poor wife! This is the first produce of this
unhappy crown! And now," he cried to the old man, with all the
impetuosity of pain, "wilt thou still demand that cruel sacrifice? that
unbearable sacrifice?"

Hildebrand slowly rose.

"Nothing is unbearable that is necessary. Winter is bearable, and age,
and death. They come, and we bear it. Because we must. But I hear the
voices of women, and rustling garments. Let us go."

Witichis turned from him to the door.

There, under the lifted curtain of the tent, stood Rauthgundis, his
wife, dressed in grey garments and a black veil, and pressing a small
black urn to her bosom.

A cry of loving pain and painful love; and the husband and wife were
locked in a close embrace.

Silently the witnesses left the tent.



                              CHAPTER XV.

Outside Teja held the old man back by his mantle.

"Thou torturest the King in vain," he said. "He will never consent. Now
least of all!"

"How dost thou know?" interrupted the old man.

"Peace; I guess it. As I guess all misfortune."

"Then thou wilt also acknowledge that he _must_ consent."

"He--_he_ will not do it."

"But--thou meanest her?"

"Perhaps!"

"She will!" cried Hildebrand.

"Yes, she is a wonder of a woman," answered Teja.

While, during the next few days, the now childless pair lived in quiet
seclusion, and Witichis scarcely ever left his tent, it happened that
the outposts of the royal besiegers and the sentries of the Gothic
garrison of Ravenna--taking advantage of the armistice which, as a
matter of fact, had ensued--entered into frequent communication.

Scolding and disputing, they reproached each other with being the cause
of the civil war.

The besiegers complained that the garrison had closed the gates of his
royal fortress upon the King during the greatest distress of the
nation. The Ravennese blamed Witichis for depriving the daughter of the
Amelungs of her rights.

As old Earl Grippa was making the round of the walls, he listened,
unobserved, to one of these conversations.

He suddenly came forward, and called to Witichis's soldiers who were
standing below, praising their King.

"Indeed?" he cried; "is it acting nobly and rightly to attack us like a
madman, instead of giving an answer to our moderate demand? And he
could so easily spare the blood of the Goths! We only want Mataswintha
for our Queen! Well, can he not remain King? Is it so hard to share
throne and couch with the most beautiful woman in the world, with the
Princess Beautiful-hair,' of whose charms the singers sing in the
streets? Must so many thousand brave Goths die, rather than that? Well
then, let him continue to attack. We will see which breaks down first;
his obstinacy or these walls!"

These words of the old commander made an immense impression on all the
Goths before the walls. They knew of nothing to say in defence of their
King. They also knew as little of his marriage as the rest of the army.
In this the presence of Rauthgundis in the camp had altered little, for
truly she had not come like a queen.

They hastened back to the camp in great excitement, and told what they
had heard; how that the obstinacy of the King had sacrificed their
brethren.

"'Twas for this reason he kept the object of the embassy a secret!"
they cried.

Soon groups were formed in every lane of the camp, all much excited,
speaking of the affair, and blaming the King in tones which grew ever
louder.

The Germans of those times treated their kings with a freedom of speech
which horrified the Byzantines.

In this case, vexation at the retreat from Rome; the shame of the
defeat before Ravenna; regret for their sacrificed comrades, and anger
at this secrecy; all worked together to excite the Goths to a storm of
indignation against the King, which was not the less violent, because
it was still restrained.

This temper of the army did not escape the notice of the leaders. As
they passed through the camp, the words of blame were scarcely
restrained. But they would only have let loose the mischief if they had
angrily rebuked it.

And often, when Earl Teja or Hildebad would have interposed a word in
mitigation, old Hildebrand kept them back.

"Let the tide swell a little more," he said; "when it is high enough I
will control it. The only danger would be--" he added, half to himself.

"If those in the rebel camp opposite were beforehand with us," said
Teja.

"Right, thou guesser of riddles! But things go well for us there.
Deserters relate that the princess steadfastly refuses. She threatens
to kill herself rather than give her hand to Arahad."

"Bah!" said Hildebad; "I would risk that!"

"Because thou knowest not that passionate creature, that child of the
Amelungs! She inherits the fiery blood of Theodoric, and will, after
all, play us, too, a bad trick."

"Witichis is another kind of wooer than that boy of Asta," whispered
Teja.

"I trust to that also," answered Hildebrand. "Leave him in peace a few
days longer," added the old man; "his grief must have its way. Till it
is assuaged he can be brought to do nothing. Do not disturb him. Let
him remain quietly in his tent with his wife. I shall be obliged to
disturb him soon enough."

But the old man was compelled to rouse the King from his grief sooner
and in a different way from what he had intended.

The Assembly at Regeta had made a law against all Goths who deserted to
the Byzantines, condemning [them] to an ignominious death.

On the whole, such desertions occurred very rarely, but still, in parts
of the country where a few Goths lived among a crowded Italian
population, and many intermarriages had taken place, they were more
frequent.

The old master-at-arms was especially wroth with these renegades, who
dishonoured themselves and their nation. It was he who had introduced
this law against deserters from the army and the national flag.

Its application had not yet been necessary, and its intention was
almost forgotten.

Suddenly it was brought to mind gravely enough.

Belisarius had not yet left Rome with his main army. For more than one
reason he wished at present to make that city the principal support of
all his movements in Italy; But he had sent numerous parties of
skirmishers after the retreating Goths, to tease and disquiet them, and
particularly to take possession of the many castles, strongholds and
towns from which the barbarian garrison had been driven out and beaten
by the Italians, or, hindered by no garrison, had simply gone over to
the Emperor of the "Romani," as he called himself in Greek.

Such occurrences took place--particularly as, since the Gothic King was
in full retreat, and, after the outbreak of the rebellion, the Gothic
cause seemed half lost--almost daily.

Partly under the influence of the appearance of Belisarius's troops
before the gates, partly without such pressure, many towns and castles
surrendered.

As, however, most of them preferred to wait until they could plead the
excuse of necessity, in case of an unhoped-for victory of the Goths,
Belisarius had all the more reason to send forth against them small
troops of skirmishers, under the command of the deserters, who were
well acquainted with the country and the condition of things.

And these troops, encouraged by the continued retreat of the Goths,
ventured far into the land; every newly-taken castle became a point of
departure for further operations.

Such a party of skirmishers had lately won Castellum Marcianum, which
crowned a rocky height above an extensive pine-wood near Cæsena, close
to the royal camp.

Old Hildebrand, into whose hands Witichis had given the supreme command
since receiving his wound, observed with indignation this dangerous
success of the enemy and the treachery of the Italians.

And as he did not wish to occupy his troops against Duke Guntharis or
Ravenna--always hoping for a peaceable solution of the difficulty--he
decided to play these bold skirmishers a famous trick.

Spies had related that, on the day after Rauthgundis's arrival in the
camp, the new Byzantine garrison of Castellum Marcianum had dared to
threaten Cæsena itself, the important town in the rear of the Gothic
camp.

The old master-at-arms furiously swore destruction to the insolent
enemy. He put himself at the head of a thousand horsemen, and started
in the stillness of the night, with straw twisted round the hoofs of
the horses, in the direction of Cæsena.

The surprise succeeded perfectly. Unobserved they entered the wood at
the foot of the rock upon which the castle was situated.

Hildebrand divided his men into two parties, one of which he ordered to
surround the wood on all sides; the other to dismount and follow him
silently up to the castle.

The sentinels at the gate were taken by surprise, and the Byzantines,
finding that they were attacked by superior numbers, fled on all sides
into the wood, where the greater part of those on horseback were taken
prisoners.

The flames from the burning castle illuminated the scene.

But a small group retreated, fighting, over the little river at the
foot of the rock, which was crossed by a narrow bridge.

Here Hildebrand's pursuing horsemen were checked by a single man--a
leader, as it seemed from the splendour of his armour.

This tall, slender, and seemingly young man--his visor was
down--fought as if in desperation, covered the retreat of his men, and
had already overthrown four Goths.

Then up came the old master-at-arms, and looked on for a while at the
unequal combat.

"Yield, brave man!" he cried to the lonely combatant. "I will guarantee
thy life."

At this call the Byzantine started; for an instant he lowered his
sword, and looked at the old man.

But the next moment he had leaped forward and back again; he had cut
off the arm of his nearest adversary at one powerful stroke.

The Goths fell back a little.

Hildebrand became furious.

"Forward!" he cried. "No more pity! Aim at him with your spears!"

"He is proof against iron!" cried one of the Goths, a cousin of Teja.
"I hit him three times; he cannot be wounded."

"Thinkest thou so, Aligern?" laughed the old man grimly. "Let me see if
he be proof against stone."

And he hurled his stone battle-axe--he was almost the only one who
still carried this ancient heathen weapon--at the Byzantine.

The heavy axe crashed upon the glittering helmet of the brave defender
of the bridge, who fell as if struck by lightning.

Two men sprang towards him and raised his visor.

"Master Hildebrand," cried Aligern in astonishment, "it is no
Byzantine!"

"And no Italian!" added Gunthamund.

"Look at his golden locks--it is a Goth!" observed Hunibad.

Hildebrand came forward--and started violently.

"Torches!" he cried; "light! Yes," he added gloomily, taking up his
stone axe, "it is a Goth! And I--I have slain him," he concluded, with
icy calmness.

But his hand trembled on the shaft of his axe.

"No, master," cried Aligern, "he lives. He was only stunned; he opens
his eyes."

"He lives?" asked the old man, shuddering. "May the gods forbid!"

"Yes, he lives!" repeated the Goths, raising their prisoner.

"Then woe to him, and to me! But no! The gods of the Goths have
delivered him into my power. Bind him upon thy horse, Gunthamund; but
firmly. If he escape, it is at the peril of _thy_ head, not his.
Forward! To horse, and home!"

When they arrived at the camp, the escort asked the master-at-arms what
they should prepare for their prisoner.

"A bundle of straw for to-night," he answered, "and for to-morrow
early--a gallows."

With these words he entered the King's tent, and reported the result of
his excursion.

"We have a Gothic deserter among our prisoners," he concluded grimly.
"He must hang before sunset to-morrow."

"That is very sad," said Witichis, sighing.

"Yes; but necessary. I shall summon the court-martial for to-morrow.
Wilt thou preside?"

"No," said Witichis, "exempt me from that. I will appoint Hildebad in
my place."

"No," cried the old man, "that will not do. I am commander-in-chief as
long as thou keepest thy tent. I demand the presidency as my right."

Witichis looked at him.

"Thou art so grim and cold! Is it an enemy of thy kindred?"

"No," said Hildebrand.

"What is the name of the prisoner?"

"Hildebrand--like mine."

"Meseems thou hatest him--this Hildebrand. Thou mayst judge; but beware
of exaggerated severity. Do not forget that I pardon gladly."

"The well-being of the Goths demands his death," said Hildebrand
quietly; "and he will die!"



                              CHAPTER XVI.

Early the next morning the prisoner, with his head covered, was led to
a meadow on the north, the "cold corner" of the camp, where were
assembled the leaders of the army and a great part of the troops.

"Listen," said the prisoner to one of his escort; "is old Hildebrand on
the Ting-place?"

"He is the head of the Ting."

"They are and will ever remain barbarians! Do me a favour, friend--I
will give thee this purple belt for it. Go to the old man; tell him
that I know that I must die, but I beg him to spare me, and still more
my family--dost thou hear? my _family_--the shame of the gallows. Beg
him to send me a weapon secretly."

The Goth, Gunthamund, went to seek Hildebrand, who had already opened
the court.

The proceedings were very simple. The old man first caused the law of
Regeta to be read aloud; then witnesses proved the taking of the
prisoner, and afterwards he was led forward. A woolsack still covered
his head and shoulders.

It was just about to be taken off, when Gunthamund reached Hildebrand
and whispered in his ear.

"No," cried Hildebrand, frowning; "tell him that the shame of his
family is his _deed_, not his punishment," And he called aloud: "Show
the face of the traitor! It is Hildebrand, son of Hildegis!"

A cry of astonishment and horror ran through the crowd.

"His own grandchild!"

"Old man, thou shalt not preside! Thou art cruel to thy flesh and
blood!" cried Hildebad, starting up.

"Only just; but to every one alike," answered Hildebrand, striking his
staff upon the ground.

"Poor Witichis!" whispered Earl Teja.

But Hildebad hurried away to the camp.

"What canst thou say for thyself, son of Hildegis?" asked Hildebrand.

The young man hastily stepped forward; his face was red, but with
anger, not with shame. He showed not a trace of fear. His long yellow
hair waved in the wind.

The crowd was moved with compassion.

The mere report of his brave resistance, the discovery of his name, and
now his youth and beauty, spoke powerfully in his favour.

With flashing eyes, he looked around at the crowd, and then fixed them
with a proud expression on the old man's face.

"I protest against this court-martial!" he cried, "Your laws do not
concern me. I am a Roman--no Goth! My father died before my birth; my
mother was a Roman, the noble Cloelia. I have never felt as if this
barbarous old man was my kinsman. I despised his severity as I did his
love. He forced his name upon me, the child, and took me away from my
mother. But I ran away from him as soon as I could. I have always
called myself Flavius Cloelius, never Hildebrand. My friends were
Romans; Roman was my every thought; Roman my life! All my friends
joined Belisarius and Cethegus; could I remain behind? Kill me--you can
and you will! But confess that it is a murder, and not an act of
justice! You judge no Goth; you murder a conquered Roman, for Roman is
my soul!"

The crowd had listened to his defence silently and with mixed feelings.

But the old man rose furiously from his seat; his eyes flashed fire;
his hands trembled with rage.

"Miserable boy," he cried, "thou hast confessed that thou art the son
of a Goth! Then art thou a Goth thyself; and if thy heart is Roman,
thou deservest death for that alone. Soldiers, away with him to the
gallows!"

Once more the prisoner advanced to the foot of the judgment-seat.

"Then be accursed," he cried, "you rude and savage people! May your
nation be accursed! And, most of all, thou, old man with the wolf's
heart! Do not think that your savagery and cruelty will do you any
service! You shall be wiped away from the surface of this lovely land,
and not a trace of you shall be left behind!"

At a sign from Hildebrand, the ban-officers again threw the cover over
the prisoner's head, and led him away to a hill upon which stood a
sturdy yew-tree, deprived of its boughs and leaves.

At this moment the eyes of the crowd were diverted towards the camp,
whence the sound of horses' hoofs were heard. Soon a troop of riders
with the royal banner was seen approaching, Witichis and Hildebad at
their head.

"Stop!" cried the King from a distance. "Spare the grandchild of
Hildebrand! Pardon, pardon!"

But the old man pointed to the hill.

"Too late, King," he cried; "it is all over with the traitor. So may
all perish who forget their nation! The kingdom comes first. King
Witichis, and afterwards wife and child and grandchild!"

This act of Hildebrand made a great impression upon the army, and a
still greater one upon the King. He felt the weight which was given to
any demand of the old man by his sacrifice. And with the conviction
that resistance had now become much more difficult, he returned to his
tent.

Hildebrand did not fail to take advantage of the King's humour.

In the evening he entered the royal tent with Teja.

The husband and wife were sitting silent, hand in hand, on the camp
bed; upon a table before them stood the black urn; near it lay a small
golden locket, something like an amulet, appended to a blue ribbon; a
bronze lamp shed a faint light.

As Hildebrand gave his hand to the King, the latter looked into his
face, and saw at one glance that he had entered the tent with the fixed
resolve to carry out his intentions at whatever cost.

All present seemed silently moved by the impending conflict of feeling.

"Mistress Rauthgundis," began the old man, "I have to speak of sad
things with the King. It will hurt thee to hear them!"

Rauthgundis rose, but not to go. Deep pain and earnest love for her
husband gave to her fair and regular features a noble and elevated
expression.

Without removing her right hand from that of her husband, she laid her
left gently upon his shoulder.

"Speak freely, Hildebrand. I am his wife, and demand the half of these
sad words!"

"Mistress," the old man repeated.

"Let her remain," said the King. "Dost thou fear to tell thy thoughts
before her face?"

"Fear? no! And though I were forced to tell a god that the people of
the Goths was dearer to me than he, I should do it without fear. Know
then----"

"What! Thou wilt? Spare her, spare her!" cried Witichis, throwing his
arms around his wife.

But Rauthgundis looked at him quietly and said:

"I know all, my Witichis. Yesterday, as I was walking through the camp,
unrecognised, in the twilight, I heard the soldiers by the watch-fires
blaming thee, and praising this old man to the skies. I listened and
heard all. What he demands and what thou refusest!"

"And thou didst not tell me?"

"There was no danger. Do I not know that thou wouldst never put away
thy wife? Not for a crown, and not for that wonderfully beautiful
maiden. Who can part us? Let this old man threaten; I know that no star
hangs more safely in heaven than I in thy heart."

This security made an impression on the old man. He frowned.

"I have not to argue with thee! Witichis, I ask thee before Teja--thou
knowest how things stand: without Ravenna we are lost: Mataswintha's
hand alone can open its gates--wilt thou take this hand or not?"

Witichis sprang from his seat.

"Yes, our enemies are right! We are barbarians! Before this heartless
old man stands a splendid woman, unparalleled for her griefs as for her
fidelity; here stand the ashes of her murdered child; and he would drag
her husband away from this wife and these ashes to form another union!
Never--nevermore!"

"An hour ago representatives of all the thousands of the army were on
their way to this tent," said the old man. "They would have forced thee
to do that which I only ask. I kept them back with difficulty."

"Let them come!" cried Witichis. "They can only deprive me of my
crown--not of my wife!"

"Who wears the crown belongs to his people--not to himself!"

"Here"--Witichis took the coroneted helmet and laid it upon the table
before Hildebrand--"once more and for the last time I give thee back
the crown. I did not desire it, God knows! It has brought me nothing
but this urn of ashes. Take it back; let who will be King, and woo
Mataswintha."

But Hildebrand shook his head.

"Thou knowest that that would lead to certain destruction. We are
already split into three parties. Many thousands would never
acknowledge Arahad. Thou alone canst still uphold the kingdom. Wert
thou gone, we should be dissolved. We shall become a bundle of separate
sticks, which Belisarius will break as if in sport. Wouldst thou have
that?"

"Mistress Rauthgundis, canst thou make no sacrifice for thy people?"
asked Teja, drawing nearer.

"Thou too, haughty Teja, against me? Is this thy friendship!" cried
Rauthgundis.

"Mistress Rauthgundis," replied Teja quietly, "I honour thee more than
any other woman on earth, and therefore I ask of thee the greatest of
sacrifices----"

But Hildebrand interrupted him.

"Thou art the Queen of this nation. I know of a Gothic Queen who lived
in the heathen times of our forefathers. Hunger and plague lay heavy on
her people. Their swords were useless. The gods were angry with the
Goths. Then Swanhilde asked counsel of the oaks of the woods, and the
waves of the sea, and they answered: 'If Swanhilde dies, the Goths will
live. If Swanhilde lives, her people die.' And Swanhilde never returned
home. She thanked the gods, and sprang into the flood. But truly, that
was in the hero-time."

Rauthgundis was not unmoved.

"I love my people," she said; "and since these golden locks are all
that remain of my Athalwin"--she pointed to the locket--"I believe I
could gladly give my life for my people. I will die--yes!" she cried;
"but to live and know the man of my heart loving another--no!"

"Loving another!" cried Witichis; "how canst speak thus? Knowest thou
not, that my tortured heart beats ever and only at the sound of thy
name? Hast thou then never felt, never yet, not even at the sight of
this urn, that we are eternally one? What am I without thy love? Tear
my heart out of my bosom, place another in its place; then perhaps I
could forget thee! Yes, truly," he cried, turning to the two men, "you
know not what you do; you little know your own interest. You know not
that my love for this woman and this woman's love for me is the best
that poor Witichis possesses. She is my good genius. You know not that
you have to thank her, and her alone, if in anything I please you. I
think of her in the tumult of battle, and the thought strengthens my
arm. Of her I think when noble decisions must be made in the council;
of her clear and serene soul, of her unblemished fidelity! Oh, this
wife is the soul of my life! Deprive me of her, and your King is a
shadow, without fortune and without strength!"

And he passionately folded Rauthgundis in his arms.

She was surprised and startled; overcome with a world of bliss. Never
yet had the calm and reserved man, who habitually controlled his
feelings, spoken so of her or of his love.

Never even when he had wooed her, had he spoken with such passion as
now, when he was asked to leave her. Overpowered, she sank upon his
breast.

"Thanks, thanks, O God, for this hour of pain," she whispered. "Yes,
now I know that thy heart and soul are mine for ever!"

"And will remain thine," said Teja in a low tone, "even if another is
called his Queen. She would only share his crown, never his heart!"

These words penetrated Rauthgundis's soul. She looked at Teja, moved by
his words, with wide eyes.

Hildebrand saw it, and now considered how he should strike his final
blow.

"Who would, who could, tamper with your hearts!" he said. "A shadow
without fortune or strength! That thou wilt only become if thou
refusest to listen to my words, or break thy sacred, solemn oath. For a
_perjurer_ is more hollow than a shadow!"

"His oath?" asked Rauthgundis hastily. "What hast thou sworn?"

But Witichis sank down upon his seat and buried his face in his hands.

"What has he sworn?" repeated Rauthgundis.

Then Hildebrand, aiming every word at the hearts of the husband and
wife, spoke:

"A few years ago a man concluded a mighty bond with four friends at the
midnight hour. The sod was raised under a sacred oak, and they swore by
the ancient earth and welling water, by the flickering flame and
ethereal air. They mixed their living blood and swore a solemn oath; to
sacrifice all that they possessed, son and kindred, life, weapons and
wives and glory, to the welfare of the Goths! And if any one of them
should refuse to keep the oath, when reminded by a brother in time of
necessity, his red blood should run unavenged, like the water under the
wood-sod. Upon his head heaven should fall and crush him, and he should
be for ever subject to all the dark powers under the earth. His soul
should be condemned to eternal torture; good men should trample over
his grave, and his memory be dishonoured and covered with curses
wherever Christians ring bells or heathens offer sacrifices; wherever
the wind blows over the wide world, and mothers caress their children.
This oath was sworn by five men: by Hildebrand and Hildebad, by Teja
and Totila. But who was the fifth? Witichis, son of Waltaris."

And he suddenly drew back Witichis's left-hand sleeve.

"Look here, Rauthgundis, the scar has not yet vanished. But the oath
has vanished from his soul. Thus he swore before he was made King. And
when the thousands of Goths, on the field of Regeta, lifted him on the
shield, he swore a second oath: 'My life, my happiness, all that I
have, do I dedicate to you, the people of the Goths. I swear it by the
God of heaven and by my faith.' Well, Witichis, son of Waltaris, King
of the Goths, I now remind thee of that double oath. I ask thee whether
thou wilt sacrifice, as thou hast sworn to do, thy wife and thy
happiness to the people of the Goths? See, I too have lost three sons
for this people, and, without shrinking, I have sacrificed and
condemned my grandchild, the last scion of my race. Speak, wilt thou do
the like? Wilt thou keep thine oath? or wilt thou break it and live
accursed? cursed by the living and cursed amongst the dead?"

Witichis was convulsed with pain at the words of the old man.

Then Rauthgundis rose. She laid her left hand on her husband's breast,
and stretched forth her right as if to protect him from Hildebrand.

"Cease," she said, "leave, him alone. It is enough! He will do what
thou desirest. He will not dishonour and perjure himself for the sake
of his wife."

But Witichis sprang up, and held her fast in both his arms as if they
were about to tear her from him at once.

"Now go," she said to the two men; "leave me alone with him."

Teja turned to go; Hildebrand hesitated.

"Go, go!" she cried, laying her hand upon the marble urn; "I swear to
thee by the ashes of my child, that at sunrise he shall be free!"

"No," cried Witichis, "I will not put away my wife! never!"

"Thou shalt not. It is not thou who sendest me away--I turn away from
thee. Rauthgundis goes to save her people and her husband's honour.
Thou canst never tear away thy heart from me; I know that mine it will
remain, now more than ever! Go, Hildebrand and Teja, what we two have
now to go through, will admit of no witness."

The two men silently left the place; silently they went together down
the lane of tents; at the corner the old man stopped.

"Good-night, Teja," he said; "it is now done!"

"Yes; who knows if well done? A noble, noble sacrifice! Many more will
follow, and, meseems there, in the stars, it stands written--in vain!
But for honour then, if not for victory! Farewell."

He drew his dark mantle closely round his shoulders, and disappeared
like a shadow into the night.



                             CHAPTER XVII.

The next morning, before cockcrow, a veiled woman rode out of the camp.
A man in a brown war-mantle walked beside her, holding her horse's
bridle, and ever and again looking into her veiled face.

At an arrow's length behind them rode a servant, with a bundle at his
back, where hung a heavy club.

They went on their way for some time in silence.

At last they reached a woody eminence; behind them lay the broad plain
where stood the Gothic camp and the city of Ravenna; before them, to
the north-west, the road which led to the Via Æmilia.

The woman checked her horse.

"The sun is just rising. I have sworn that it shall find thee free.
Farewell, my Witichis!"

"Hurry not so away from me," he said, pressing her hand.

"I must keep my word if my heart breaks! It must be!"

"Thou goest more easily than I remain!"

She smiled painfully.

"I leave my life behind me; thou hast yet a life before thee."

"And what a life!"

"The life of a King for his people, as thine oath demands."

"Fatal oath!"

"It was right to swear it; it is a duty to keep it. And thou wilt think
of me in the gilded halls of Rome, as I of thee in my hut, deep in the
ravine. Thou wilt not forget thy wife, nor the ten years of our faith
and love, nor our sweet boy."

"Oh, my wife, my wife!" cried the tortured man, pressing his face
against the saddle-bow, and putting both arms around her.

She bent over him and laid her hand upon his head.

Meanwhile Wachis had overtaken them; he looked at the group for a short
time, and then he could bear it no longer.

He pulled his master gently by the mantle.

"Master, listen; I can give you good advice. Do you not hear me?"

"What canst thou advise?"

"Come with us! Up, away! Mount my horse and ride away with Mistress
Rauthgundis. I will follow afterwards. Leave those who torture you till
the bright drops stand in your eyes; leave them, and all the rubbish of
crown and kingdom. It has brought you no happiness. They do not mean
well by you. Who would part man and wife for a dead crown? Up and away,
I say! And I know a rocky nest where no one can find you but an eagle
or a chamois."

"Shall thy master run away from his kingdom, like a bad slave from the
mill?"

"Farewell, Witichis. Here, take the locket with the blue ribbon; the
ringlet of our boy is in it, and one," she whispered, kissing him on
the forehead, and hanging the locket round his neck, "one of
Rauthgundis'. Farewell, thou, my heart's life!"

He raised himself to look into her eyes.

She suddenly struck her horse--"Forward, Wallada!"--and galloped away.
Wachis followed.

Witichis stood motionless, and looked after her.

She stopped before the road turned into the wood--once more she waved
her hand, and the next minute had disappeared.

Witichis listened to the tramp of the horses as if in a dream. When the
sound ceased he turned.

But he could not leave the place.

He stepped out of the road. At the other side of the ditch lay a large
mossy block of stone. There the King of the Goths seated himself,
rested his arms upon his knees, and buried his face in his hands. He
pressed them hard against his eyes, to shut out the whole world from
his grief.

Tears trickled through his fingers. He did not notice them.

Horsemen galloped past. He scarcely heard them.

So he sat motionless for hours; so motionless, that the birds of the
wood hopped close to him.

The sun stood in the south.

At last--he heard some one call his name.

He looked up. Earl Teja stood before him.

"I knew well," said Teja, "that thou hadst not fled like a coward. Come
back with me, and save thy kingdom. When, this morning, thou wert not
found in thy tent, the report spread through the camp that, despairing
of kingdom and happiness, thou hadst fled. It soon reached the city of
Ravenna and Guntharis. The Ravennese threaten a sally, and that they
will go over to Belisarius. Arahad tempts the army to give him the
crown. Two, three opposing Kings arise. Everything will fall to pieces
if thou comest not to save us!"

"I come!" cried Witichis. "Let them take care! The best heart in the
world has been broken for the sake of this crown; it is sacred, and
they shall not desecrate it. Come, Teja, back to the camp!"




                         BOOK IV.-_Continued._

                               WITICHIS.

"But the Goths chose Witichis for their king, a man, not indeed of
noble birth, but of great fame as a warrior."--_Procopius: Wars of the
Goths_, i. 11.



                                PART II.



                               CHAPTER I.

When King Witichis readied the camp, he found it almost in a state of
anarchy.

The pressing need of the moment forcibly roused him from his grief, and
gave him sufficient occupation.

He found the army split into numerous parties, and on the point of
dissolution. He acknowledged to himself that, if he had abdicated, or
abandoned the camp, the complete ruin of the Gothic cause would have
been the consequence. He found many of the troops already on the point
of departure. Some were about to join Earl Grippa in Ravenna; others to
go over to the rebels; others again to fly across the Alps. Many spoke
of the choice of a new king, and here, too, the different parties
opposed each other with threats of violence.

Hildebrand and Hildebad still kept together those who did not believe
in the flight of the King. The old master-at-arms had declared that if
Witichis had really deserted them, he would not rest until he had dealt
to him the punishment of Theodoric, while Hildebad rated at those who
could believe Witichis capable of such baseness.

They had guarded the roads to the city and to the rebel camp, and
threatened to oppose force to every movement in those directions; while
Duke Guntharis, having heard a report of the confusion, was already
advancing against the royal camp.

Everywhere Witichis found discontented groups of troops on the point of
departure; everywhere he heard words of blame and beheld uplifted
weapons. At any moment the camp might become a scene of bloodshed.

Quickly resolved, he hurried to his tent, adorned himself with the
coroneted helmet and the golden sceptre, mounted Boreas, his powerful
charger, and galloped through the lines of tents, followed by Teja, who
bore the blue banner of Theodoric.

In the middle of the camp they met with a crowd of men, women, and
children--for the latter generally accompanied a Gothic army--who,
murmuring and threatening, were moving towards the western gate.

Hildebad had sent his soldiers to bar this gate with levelled lances.

"Let us go out," cried the people. "The King has fled, the war is over,
all is lost. We will save our lives."

"The King is no coward like thee!" cried Hildebad, pushing back the
nearest man.

"Yes, he is a traitor!" cried the latter. "He has forsaken and betrayed
us for the sake of a woman's tears."

"Yes," said another, "he has killed three thousand of our brothers and
has fled."

"Thou liest!" said a quiet voice. Witichis had turned the corner of a
tent.

"Hail, King Witichis!" cried Hildebad. "Do you see him, you rabble? Did
I not tell you? But it was high time thou camest--things were getting
to a desperate pass."

Just then Hildebrand came galloping up with a few horsemen.

"Hail, King Witichis!" he cried, and turning to his
companions--"Hasten, heralds, through the camp," said he, "and tell
what you have seen; and all the people will cry: 'Hail, Witichis, our
faithful King!'"

But Witichis turned from him with a look of anguish.

The heralds galloped away in all directions, and shortly there arose
through the whole camp the thundering shout, "Hail, King Witichis!"
Even those who had just been murmuring joined unanimously in the cry.

Witichis listened to these acclamations with a look full of pride and
pain, and Teja whispered to him: "Now thou seest that thou hast saved
the kingdom."

"Up! lead us to victory!" cried Hildebad, "for Guntharis and Arahad
approach! They think to surprise us without a chief and in complete
disorder. At them! They shall find themselves mistaken. At them! and
down with the rebels!"

"Down with the rebels!" thundered the soldiers, glad to find an outlet
for their excited passions.

But the King made a sign.

"Peace! No more shall Gothic blood flow from wounds made by Gothic
weapons. Wait patiently here. Thou, Hildebad, open the gate for me.
None shall follow me. I alone go to the rebels. Thou, Earl Teja,
control the troops until I return. But thou, Hildebrand," he cried,
raising his voice, "ride to the gates of Ravenna, and loudly bid them
open. Their desire is fulfilled, and, before evening, we will enter:
King Witichis and Queen Mataswintha."

He spoke these words with such sorrowful dignity, that the hearers
received them in reverent silence.

Hildebad opened the gate of the camp. Without could be discerned the
rebels, approaching at a quick march; loudly sounded their war-cry as
the gate opened.

King Witichis gave his sword to Earl Teja, and rode slowly to meet
them. The gate closed behind him.

"He seeks death," whispered Hildebad.

"No," said Teja, "he seeks the salvation of the Goths."

On recognising the solitary horseman, the rebels were amazed. Near the
brothers--who marched at the head of the troops--rode the chief of the
Avarian archers. He held his hand over his small and twinkling eyes
and cried:

"By the horse of the war-god, that is the King himself! Now, my boys,
sons of the steppes, aim well, and the war is over!" and he quickly
took his bow from his shoulder.

"Stop, Chan Warchun," cried Duke Guntharis, laying his mailed hand upon
the other's shoulder. "Thou hast sadly erred twice in the same breath.
Thou hast called Earl Witichis the King: that may be forgiven thee.
Thou wouldst murder him who comes as a messenger of peace. That may be
Avarian, but is not Gothic custom. Away with thee and thy troop out of
my camp!"

The Chan started and looked at Guntharis in astonishment.

"Away, at once!" repeated Duke Guntharis.

The Avarian laughed and signed to his horsemen.

"'Tis all one to me. Children, we go to Belisarius. Queer people, these
Goths! Giant bodies with children's hearts!"

Meanwhile Witichis had ridden up.

Guntharis and Arahad looked at him inquiringly.

Unusual solemnity was added to the customary simple dignity of his
manner; the majesty of deep grief.

"I come to speak with you of the welfare of the Goths. Brother shall
slay brother no more. Let us enter Ravenna together, and together
conquer Belisarius. I shall wed Mataswintha, and you two shall stand
nearest to my throne."

"Never!" cried Arahad passionately.

"Thou forgettest," said Duke Guntharis proudly, "that thy bride is in
_our_ tents."

"Duke Guntharis of Tuscany, I might answer that shortly _we_ shall be
in your tents. We are more numerous and not less brave than you, and,
Duke, we have right on our side. I will not speak of that, but only
warn you of the fate of the Goths. Should you conquer _us_, you are too
weak to conquer Belisarius. Even united, we are scarcely strong enough
for that. Give way!"

"It is for thee to give way," said the Wölfung. "If thou lovest the
Goths, lay down thy crown. Canst thou make no sacrifice for thy
people?"

"I can. I have done so. Hast thou a wife, O Guntharis?"

"I have a dear wife."

"I too! I _had_ a dear wife. I have sacrificed her to my people. I have
sent her away, in order to woo Mataswintha."

Duke Guntharis was silent.

But Arahad cried: "Then thou hast never loved her!"

Witichis started; the force of his grief and his love redoubled. His
cheeks flushed, and casting an annihilating look at the alarmed youth,
he cried:

"Talk not to me of love! Blaspheme not, thou foolish boy! Because red
lips and white limbs flash before thee in thy dreams, darest thou to
speak of love? What knowest thou of what I have lost in this wife, the
mother of my sweet child? A world of love and faith! Irritate me not.
My heart is sore. I control my pain and despair with difficulty. Do not
exasperate them, or they will break loose!"

Duke Guntharis had become very thoughtful.

"I knew thee, Witichis, in the wars with the Gepidæ. Never saw I
ignoble man deal such noble strokes. I know that there is nought false
in thee. I know the love which binds a man to a good wife. And thou
hast sacrificed such a wife to thy people? That is much!"

"Brother, of what thinkest thou?" cried Arahad. "What dost thou intend
to do?"

"I intend not to allow the House of the Wölfungs to be outdone in
generosity. Noble blood, Arahad, demands noble acts! Tell me one thing
more, Witichis. Wherefore hast thou not rather sacrificed thy crown,
even thy life, than thy wife?"

"Because it would have been the certain destruction of the kingdom.
Twice I would have yielded the crown to Earl Arahad; twice the leaders
of my army swore that they would never acknowledge him. Three, four
Gothic kings might have been chosen, but, by my honour, Earl Arahad
would never have been acknowledged. Then I tore my wife from my
bleeding heart; and now, Duke Guntharis, remember thou also the people
of the Goths. The House of the Wölfungs is lost if the Goths are lost.
If Belisarius lay the axe to the roots of the trunk, the noblest
branches will fall too. I have renounced my wife, the crown of my life;
renounce thou the hope of a crown!"

"It shall not be sung in the halls of the Goths that the freedman
Witichis was more self-sacrificing than the chief of the nobility! The
strife is at an end; I greet thee, my King."

And the proud Duke bent his knee to Witichis, who raised him and
pressed him to his heart.

"Brother! brother! what shame thou dost me!" cried Arahad.

"I look upon it as an honour," said Guntharis quietly. "And as a sign
that my King sees no cowardice, but rather nobleness, in my homage, I
beg a favour. Amelungs and Balthes have ousted my family from the place
which belonged to it among the people of the Goths."

"At this moment," answered Witichis, "thou hast redeemed that place.
The Goths shall never forget that the generosity of the Wölfungs has
saved them from a civil war."

"And, as a sign of this, thou wilt give us the right to bear the
standard of the Goths before the troops in every battle?"

"Be it so," said the King, giving him his right hand; "and none can be
more worthy."

"Thanks, O King! Let us now go to Mataswintha."

"Mataswintha!" cried Arahad, who had looked on at this reconciliation,
which buried all his hopes, in dismay. "Ha! you remind me at the right
time. You can take the crown from me--let it go--but not my love, and
not the duty of protecting my beloved. She has refused me, but I shall
love her until death! I have protected her from my brother, who would
have forced her to wed me. No less faithfully will I protect her now if
you two attempt to force her to give her hand to my hated enemy. That
hand, which is dearer to me than all the crowns of the world, shall be
free!"

And he quickly mounted his horse, and galloped off to the camp.

Witichis looked after him anxiously.

"Let him go," said Duke Guntharis; "we two, united, have nothing to
fear. Let us now reconcile the troops, since the leaders are friends."

While Guntharis first led the King through his lines of troops, and
called upon them at once to do him homage, which they did with joy, and
afterwards Witichis took the Wölfung and his leaders with him into his
camp, where the victory so peacefully gained was looked upon as
miraculous, Arahad collected together a small troop of about a hundred
horsemen, who were faithfully attached to him, and galloped back with
them to his camp.

He soon reached the tent of Mataswintha, who indignantly rose at his
entrance.

"Be not angry. Princess. This time thou hast no right to be so. Arahad
comes to fulfil his last duty. Fly! thou must follow me!" And, in the
impetuosity of his excitement, he grasped her small white hand.

Mataswintha receded a step, and laid her hand upon the broad golden
girdle which confined her white under-garment.

"Fly?" she asked. "Fly whither?"

"Over the sea! over the Alps! Anywhere for liberty; for thy liberty is
endangered."

"Only by thee!"

"By me no longer; and I can protect thee no more. So long as only my
happiness was at stake, I could be cruel to myself and honour thy will.
But now----"

"But now?" repeated Mataswintha, turning pale.

"They intend thee for another. My brother, the army, and our enemies in
Ravenna and the opposite camp, are all agreed. Soon a thousand voices
will call thee, the victim, to the bridal altar. I cannot bear to think
of it! Such a soul, such beauty, a sacrifice to an unloved marriage
bond!"

"Let them come!" said Mataswintha. "We will see if they can force me!"
And she pressed the dagger which she carried in her girdle to her
heart. "Who is the new despot who threatens me?"

"Do not ask!" cried Arahad. "Thy enemy, who is not worthy of thee; who
does not love thee; he--but follow me--fly! They already approach!"

Horses' hoofs were heard outside.

"I remain! Who can force the will of the grandchild of Theodoric?"

"No; thou shalt not, must not, fall into the hands of those heartless
men, who value neither thee nor thy beauty, but only thy right to the
crown. Follow me----"

At this moment the curtain at the entrance of the tent was pushed
aside. Earl Teja entered. Two Gothic boys, dressed in festive garments
of white silk, followed him; they bore a purple cushion, covered with a
veil.

Teja advanced to the middle of the tent, and kneeled before
Mataswintha. He, like the boys, wore a green spray of rue round his
helmet. But his eyes and brow were gloomy, as he said:

"I greet thee. Queen of the Goths and Italians!"

Mataswintha looked at him amazed.

Teja rose, went up to the boys, took a golden circlet and a green
wreath of rue from the cushion, and said:

"I give thee the bridal wreath and the crown, Mataswintha, and invite
thee to the wedding and coronation; the litter awaits thee."

Arahad laid his hand on his sword.

"Who sends thee?" asked Mataswintha, with a beating heart, but her hand
upon her dagger.

"Who but Witichis, the King of the Goths?"

On hearing this a ray of ineffable joy shone from Mataswintha's
beautiful eyes. She raised both hands to heaven and cried:

"Thanks, O heaven! Thy stars and my true heart are not belied. I knew
it!"

She took the coronet into her white hands and pressed it firmly upon
her golden hair.

"I am ready," she said. "Lead me to thy master and mine."

And she majestically held out her hand to Earl Teja, who reverently led
her out of the tent.

But Arahad looked after her in speechless wonder as she disappeared,
his hand still upon his sword.

He was roused by the entrance of Eurich, one of his followers, who came
up to him, and laying his hand upon his shoulder, asked:

"What now? The horses stand and wait. Whither?"

"Whither?" exclaimed Arahad, starting; "whither? There is only one way,
and that we will take. To the Byzantines and death!"



                              CHAPTER II.

In the peaceful light of late afternoon shone the chapel and convent
which Valerius had built in order to release his daughter from the
service of the Church. It was situated at the foot of the Apennines, to
the northeast of Perusia and Asisum, and to the south of Petra and
Eugubium, upon a rocky precipice above the little town of Taginæ.

The cloister, built of the dark red stone of the neighbourhood,
enclosed in its quadrangle a quiet garden, green with shrubberies.

A cool arched passage ran round all its four sides, decorated in the
grave Byzantine style, with statues of the apostles, mosaics, and
frescoes on a golden background.

This ornamentation consisted in symbolic pictures from the sacred
writings, especially from the Revelations of St. John, the favourite
Gospel of that time.

Solemn stillness reigned over the place. Life seemed excluded from
within these high and strong walls.

Cypresses and arbor-vitæ predominated in the groups of trees in the
garden, where the song of a bird was never heard. The strict conventual
order suffered no bird, lest the sweet song of the nightingale might
disturb the pious souls in their devotions.

It was Cassiodorus who, already inclined to a severe monastic rule when
minister of Theodoric, and full of Biblical learning, had sketched for
his friend Valerius the plan for the outer and inner government of this
convent--similar to the rules of the monastery which he himself had
founded at Squillacium--and had watched over its execution. His pious
but severe mind, so alienated from the flesh and the world, was
expressed in the smallest details.

The twenty widows and maidens who lived here as nuns passed their days
in prayer and psalm-singing, chastisement and penitence, and also in
works of Christian charity; for they visited the sick and the poor of
the neighbourhood, comforting and nursing body and soul.

It made a solemn, poetical, but very sad impression upon the beholder
when one of these pious nuns came walking through the dark avenue of
cypresses, clad in a flowing dark-grey garment, which trailed on the
ground, and a white close-fitting kalantika upon her head, a costume
which Christendom had received from the Egyptian priests of Isis.

Before every cross of the many which were cut in the box-trees the nuns
stood still and folded their hands in adoration. They always walked
alone, and dumb as shadows they glided past each other when they
chanced to meet; for communication was reduced to the absolutely
necessary.

In the middle of the garden a spring flowed from beneath a
dark-coloured rock, surrounded by cypresses; marble seats were fixed in
the rock.

It was a retired, lovely spot; wild roses formed a sort of arbour, and
almost entirely concealed a rough bas-relief sculptured in the rock,
representing the martyrdom of St. Stephen.

Near this spring sat, eagerly reading in a roll of papyrus, a beautiful
maiden, clad in a snow-white garment, held up on the left shoulder by a
golden clasp. A spray of ivy was twined in the dark brown hair, which
flowed back from the brow in soft waves. It was Valeria.

When the columns of her home at Neapolis had been overthrown, she had
found an asylum within these strong walls. She had become paler and
graver in this lonely dwelling, but her eyes still beamed with all
their former beauty.

She read with avidity; the contents of the papyrus seemed to entrance
her; her finely-cut lips moved involuntarily, and at last she began to
read aloud in a low voice:

     "His child to Hector of the brazen helm
      Was given in marriage; she it was who now
      Met him, and by her side the nurse, who bore
      Clasped to her breast, his all-unconscious child,
      Hector's loved infant, fair as morning star;
      Silent he smiled as on his boy he gazed,
      But at his side, Andromache in tears,
      Hung on his arm, and thus the chief addressed:
      'Dear lord, thy dauntless spirit will work thy doom;
      Nor hast thou pity on this thy helpless child,
      Or me, forlorn to lie thy widow soon:
      For thee will all the Greeks with force combined
      Assail and slay: for me, 'twere better far,
      Of thee bereft, to lie beneath the sod;
      Nor comfort shall be mine, if thou be lost,
      But endless grief: to me nor sire is left,
      Nor honoured mother;
      But, Hector, thou to me art all in one,
      Sire, mother, brethren! thou, my wedded love!'"

She read no further; her large eyes grew moist; her voice died away;
her head sank upon her bosom.

"Valeria!" said a mild voice, and Cassiodorus bent forward over her
shoulder; "tears upon the book of comfort! But what do I see--the
'Iliad?' Child, I gave you the Evangelists!"

"Pardon me, Cassiodorus; my heart clings to other gods than yours. You
cannot imagine how, the more the shadow of earnest self-denial presses
upon me since I entered these walls, the more tenaciously my resisting
heart holds fast to the last ties that bind me to the world. And my
mind vacillates between disgust and love."

At this moment a loud and cheerful sound broke the silence; a strange
tone in these quiet precincts, which usually echoed only the low choral
of the nuns.

Trumpets sounded the merry signal of the Gothic horsemen. The tones
penetrated Valerians heart with a life-giving feeling. The gatekeeper
came running from the dwelling-house.

"Master," he cried, "bold horsemen are outside the gate. They make a
noise and demand meat and drink. They will not be refused, and their
leader--there he is!"

"Totila!" cried Valeria, and flew to meet her lover, who appeared in
his glittering armour and white mantle. "Oh, you bring me air and
life!"

"And new hope and old love!" said Totila, and held her in a fast
embrace.

"Whence come you? How long you have been away!"

"I come straightway from Paris and Aurelianum, from the courts of the
Frank kings. Oh, Cassiodorus, how well off are those on the other side
of the mountains! What an easy life have they! There heaven and earth
and tradition do not fight against their German spirit. The Rhenus and
Danubius are near, and uncounted Germanic races dwell there in old and
unbroken strength; we, on the contrary, are like an advanced outpost, a
forlorn hope, a single block of rock, worn away by the envious
elements. But all the greater fame," he continued, drawing himself up,
"if we can create and uphold a kingdom for the Germans in the centre of
the country of the Romans! And what a magic lies in your fatherland,
Valeria! And we have made it ours. How my heart rejoiced when olives
and laurels and the deep deep blue of heaven again greeted my eyes! I
felt that if my people can victoriously sustain themselves in this
wondrous land, mankind will see its noblest ideal realised."

Valeria pressed his hand.

"And what have you accomplished?" asked Cassiodorus.

"Much! Everything! At the court of the Merovingian, Childebert, I
met with ambassadors from Byzantium, who had already half persuaded
him to invade Italy as their allies. The gods--forgive me, pious
father--Heaven was with me and my words. I succeeded in altering
Childebert's sentiments. In the worst case, his weapons will remain
neutral. But I hope he will send an army to our assistance."

"Where did you leave Julius?"

"I accompanied him to his lovely home, Avenio. There I left him among
blooming almond-trees and oleanders; there he wanders, no more with
'Plato.' but almost always with 'Augustinus' in his hand; and dreams
and dreams of eternal peace between the nations, of perfect goodness,
and of the kingdom of God! It is indeed lovely in those green vales;
but I do not envy him his leisure. My ideal is folk and fatherland. And
my only desire is to fight for this people of the Goths. Everywhere in
my backward journey I drove the people to arms. I already met three
strong troops on the way to Ravenna. I myself lead a fourth to our
brave King. At last we shall advance against these Greeks, and then
revenge for Neapolis!" and with flashing eyes he raised his spear. He
was very beautiful to look upon.

Valeria threw herself into his arms.

"Oh see, Cassiodorus!" she cried; "this is _my_ world! _my_ joy! my
heaven! Manly courage and the glitter of arms and love of one's people,
and the soul moved with love and hate--does not this satisfy the human
soul?"

"Yes; while happy and young! It is pain which leads the mind to
heaven."

"My pious father," said Totila, laying his right hand upon the shoulder
of Cassiodorus, and drawing Valeria close to him with his left, "it ill
becomes me to argue with you, who are older, wiser, and better. But I
feel just the contrary. If I could ever doubt the goodness of God, it
is when I see pain and undeserved suffering. When I saw my noble
Miriam's eyes extinguished in death, my doubting heart asked: 'Does
there then exist no God?' In happiness and the sunshine of life is the
grace of the Supreme Being revealed to me. He certainly wills the
happiness of mankind--pain is His sacred secret; I trust that also this
riddle will be made clear to us. But meanwhile let us joyfully do our
best upon earth, and allow no shadow to darken our minds too long. In
this belief, Valeria, let us part. For I must go to King Witichis with
my troop."

"You leave me? Already? Ah, when and where shall I see you again?"

"You shall see me again; take my word in pledge. I know the day will
come when I shall have the right to take you from these gloomy walls
and lead you to life and sunshine. Meanwhile, do not allow yourself to
give way to sad thoughts. The day of victory and happiness will come;
and I rejoice that I draw my sword at once for my people and my love."

While he was speaking the gatekeeper had brought a letter for
Cassiodorus.

"I too must leave you, Valeria," said the latter. "Rusticiana, the
widow of Boëthius, calls me to her death-bed. She wishes to ease her
mind of old guilt. I go to Tifernum."

"My way leads thither also; we will go together, Cassiodorus. Farewell,
my Valeria!"

After a brief leave-taking, the maiden watched her lover set forth.

She climbed a small tower on the garden wall, and looked after him.

She saw him swing himself into the saddle; she saw his horsemen gallop
after him.

Their helmets glittered in the evening light; the blue flag fluttered
merrily in the wind; it was a picture of life, strength, and youth.

She looked after the troop for some time with intense longing.

But as it disappeared more and more into the distance, the joyous
courage with which her lover's visit had imbued her, gradually forsook
her. Sad forebodings arose in her heart, and she unconsciously
expressed her feelings in the words of her beloved Homer:

    "'Achilles, too, thou see'st; how stalwart, tall, and fair!
      Yet must he yield to death and stubborn fate,
      Whene'er at morn, or noon, or eve, the spear
      Or arrow from the bow may reach his life.'"

Sighing painfully, she left the quickly darkening garden, and entered
the damp walls of the convent.



                              CHAPTER III.

Meanwhile King Witichis, in his armed city of Ravenna, displayed all
the arts and activity of an experienced general.

As, week by week, and day by day, larger or smaller divisions of the
Gothic troops which had been treacherously sent to the frontiers by
Theodahad, returned to the city, the King was unceasingly occupied in
arming, training, and regulating the whole army, which was gradually to
be brought to the number of a hundred and fifty thousand.

For Theodoric's reign had been extremely peaceful; the garrisons of the
frontier provinces had alone seen active service against the Gepidæ,
Bulgarians, and Avarians; and during a peace of more than thirty years
the regulations of the army had become somewhat rusty.

Therefore the King, supported by his friends and generals, had work
enough on his hands.

The arsenals and docks were emptied; immense magazines were built in
the city, and, between the threefold walls, endless rows of workshops
were erected for smiths and armourers of all kinds, who were obliged to
labour day and night, in order to satisfy the demands of the ever
increasing army, and the eager exigence of the King.

All Ravenna had become a camp.

Nothing was heard but the hammers of the smiths, the neighing of
horses, the rattle of arms, and the war-cry of man[oe]uvring troops.

In this turmoil and restless activity Witichis sought to deaden his
grief as well as he could, and looked eagerly forward to the day when
he might lead his brave army to meet the enemy.

But though his first impulse was to lose himself in the vortex of a
fierce struggle, he did not forget his duty as King, but sent Duke
Guntharis and Hildebad to Belisarius with a proposal of peace on the
most moderate conditions.

His time thus completely claimed by affairs of state, Witichis had
scarcely a thought or look to spare for his Queen, upon whom, as he
also imagined, he could bestow no greater favour than the undisturbed
enjoyment of liberty.

But since the fatal marriage feast of Witichis and Mataswintha, at the
end of which she had learned in the bridal chamber, from his lips, that
he did not, could never love her, and had but called her wife to save
the nation, Mataswintha had been possessed by a demon: the demon of
insatiable revenge.

The most deadly hatred is that of revolted love.

From her childhood Witichis had been Mataswintha's ideal. Her pride,
her hope, and her love were all centred in him; and she had as little
doubted that the sun would rise on the morrow, as that her longing for
him would be satisfied. And now she was forced to confess to herself
that he had discovered her passion, and did not reciprocate it; and
that, although she was his Queen, her love for him appeared criminal,
with regard to his banished wife, who yet alone reigned in his heart.

He, whom she had looked upon as her destined liberator from unworthy
bondage, had done her the greatest injury; he had caused her to enter
into a marriage bond without love. He had deprived her of her liberty,
and had refused his heart in exchange.

And wherefore? What had been the cause of this sin? The Gothic kingdom,
and the Gothic crown; for, to uphold these, he had not hesitated a
moment to blast her whole life.

"If he had merely failed to reciprocate my love," she said to herself,
"I should have been too proud to hate him. But he draws me to him,
bestows upon me, as if in mockery, the name of wife, leads me to the
very brink of happiness, and then contemptuously thrusts me down into
the night of unspeakable humiliation! And why all this? For the sake of
an empty sound the Gothic kingdom! For a circlet of gold! Woe to him,
and woe to his idol, to which he has sacrificed me! He shall repent it.
Without mercy he has destroyed my idol--his own image. Well, then, idol
for idol! He shall live to see his kingdom destroyed, his crown broken.
I will shatter his ideal, for whose sake he has sacrificed the bloom of
my life; and when he stands despairing and wringing his hands before
the fragments, I will say: See! thus my idol, too, was shattered!"

So, with the unstable sophistry of passion, Mataswintha accused the
unhappy man, who suffered more than herself; who had sacrificed not
only her happiness, but that of his well-beloved wife, to his
fatherland.

Fatherland!--Gothic kingdom! The words fell chilly upon the ear of the
woman who, from her childhood upward, had connected all her sufferings
with these names.

She had lived solely absorbed in the egoism of her _one_ feeling, the
poetry of her passionate love, and her whole soul was now possessed
with the desire of revenge for the loss of her happiness. She wished
that she had the power to destroy the kingdom at one blow.

But the very madness of her passion endowed her with demoniac cunning.

She understood how to hide her deadly hatred and her secret thoughts of
revenge from the King--to hide them as deeply as the love which she
still entertained for him. She was also able to show an interest in the
Gothic kingdom, which seemed to form the only tie between herself and
the King; and indeed she really took a deep interest in it, although in
an inimical sense. For she well knew that she could only injure the
kingdom and ruin the King's cause if she were initiated into all its
secrets, and intimately acquainted with its strength and weakness.

Her high position made it easy for her to learn all that she wished to
know; out of consideration for her powerful party, the knowledge of the
situation of the kingdom and army could not be withheld from the
daughter of the Amelungs. Old Earl Grippa furnished her with all the
information which he himself possessed. In more important cases she was
present at the councils which were held in the King's apartments.

Thus she was perfectly well acquainted with the position of the
kingdom; the strength, quality, and divisions of the army; the hopes
and fears of the Goths, and the plans of attack formed by the generals.
And she longed with impatience for a speedy opportunity of using her
knowledge as destructively as possible.

She could not hope to enter into relations with Belisarius himself,
therefore her eyes were naturally directed to the Italians in her
vicinity, with whom she could easily and unsuspectedly communicate; and
who, though neutral in the presence of the Goths, were, without
exception, secretly favourable to the Byzantines.

But on recalling their names to her memory, she found that there was
not one to whose wisdom and discretion she could entrust the deadly
secret: that the Queen of the Goths desired the destruction of her
kingdom.

These cowardly and insignificant men--for all the best had long since
joined Cethegus or Belisarius were neither worthy of trust nor capable
of dealing with Witichis and his friends.

Mataswintha cunningly tried to learn from the King and the Goths
themselves, which of the Romans they held to be their most dangerous
and powerful enemy; but in answer to such questions, she only heard one
name, repeated again and again, and he who owned this name was beyond
her reach in the Capitol of Rome--Cethegus the Prefect.

It was impossible for her to enter into communication with him. She
could trust none of her Roman slaves with such an important mission as
the bearing of a letter to Rome.

The clever and courageous Numidian, who fully shared the hatred of her
beloved mistress to the rude barbarians, from whom she had always
experienced contempt, had, in truth, offered, with much zeal, to find
her way to Cethegus; but Mataswintha would not expose the girl to the
perils of a journey through Italy during war-time. Therefore she was
already reconciled to the thought that she must postpone her revenge
until the march to Rome. But not the less zealously did she continue to
inquire into the plans and stratagems of the Goths.

One day she was returning from the council of war, which had been
held in the camp without the walls, in the King's tent; for, since
the armament had approached its completion, and the Goths had been
daily expecting the order to march, Witichis--partly to avoid
Mataswintha--had left his rooms in the palace and taken up his abode
among his warriors.

The Queen, accompanied only by Aspa, was walking slowly forward,
pondering upon what she had just heard. She had avoided the press and
noise of the inner camp, and pursued her way between a marshy arm of
the river Padus to the left and the rows of white tents to the right.
While she wandered on, noticing nothing, Aspa's sharp eyes were
watching a group of Goths and Italians which surrounded the platform of
a conjurer, who appeared, from the astonishment and laughter of the
spectators, to be performing new and marvellous tricks.

Aspa lingered a little to see something of these wonders. The conjurer
was a slender youth, a Celt, to judge by the dazzling white skin of his
face and bare arms, and by his long yellow hair; but this supposition
was belied by his coal-black eyes. And he really performed wonders in
the eyes of his simple audience. Now he sprang up, turned over and over
in the air, and fell, now on his hands, now on his feet. Then he seemed
to devour glowing coals with great appetite, and in their place, to
spit out coins; then he swallowed a dagger a foot long and afterwards
drew it out of the back of his head, throwing it up in the air together
with three or four others, and catching them in turn by the handle, to
the great enjoyment of the spectators, who rewarded him with laughter
and cries of admiration.

But Aspa had already lingered too long.

She looked after her mistress, and observed that her path was
intercepted by a troop of Italian carriers and livery-servants, who
evidently had not recognised the Queen, and who passed straight before
her on their way to the river, joking and making a great disturbance.
They appeared to be pointing and throwing stones at some object which
Aspa could not distinguish.

She was just about to hurry after her mistress, when the conjurer upon
the platform near her suddenly uttered a shrill cry. Aspa turned in
affright, and saw the youth take an immense leap over the heads of the
spectators, and rush at the Italians.

He was already in their midst, and, bending down, disappeared for a
moment.

But he quickly rose to his feet, and one and then another of the
Italians fell prone under his blows.

In a moment Aspa stood at the Queen's side, who had quietly withdrawn
from the turmoil, but, to her surprise, stopped short at a little
distance, pointing at the group with her finger.

And indeed the sight was a strange one.

With incredible strength and still greater agility the conjurer held
his assailants off. Springing at his adversaries, turning and bending,
retreating and then suddenly darting forward to pull the nearest down
by his foot, or to overthrow him with a powerful blow, he defended
himself bravely, and that without any weapon, with his right hand
alone; for in the left he held something close to his breast, as if
hiding and protecting it.

This unequal combat lasted several minutes.

The conjurer was pushed nearer and nearer to the water by the angry and
noisy crowd. Suddenly a naked blade glittered. One of the livery
servants, enraged at receiving a severe blow, drew his knife and sprang
at the conjurer from behind. With a cry the latter fell; his enemies
rushed upon him.

"Help! drag them away! help the poor man!" cried Mataswintha to the
soldiers, who now approached from the forsaken platform; "I, your
Queen, command you!"

The Goths hurried to the knot of struggling men; but before they could
reach them, the conjurer, who had broken from his adversaries, sprang
out of the tumbling group, and, with a last effort, darted straight off
in the direction of the two women--followed by the Italians.

What a sight!

The Gallic tunic of the poor conjurer hung in rags from his body; his
false yellow hair was torn off his head, and beneath appeared locks of
glossy black; the white hue of his neck ended in a chest the colour of
bronze.

With a last exertion of strength he reached the women, and recognised
Mataswintha.

"Protect me, save me, white goddess!" he cried, and fell at her feet.

The Italians had already reached him, and the nearest raised his knife.

But Mataswintha spread her blue mantle over the fallen man.

"Back!" she cried with majesty. "Leave him. He is under the protection
of the Queen of the Goths!"

The livery-servants fell back abashed.

"Indeed!" at last said the one with the dagger, "is this dog and son of
a dog to go unpunished? and five of us lie half dead on the ground, and
I have three teeth too few? Is there to be no punishment?"

"He is punished enough," said Mataswintha, pointing to the deep gash on
the neck of the conjurer.

"And all this fuss about a worm!" cried another. "About a snake that
escaped from his knapsack, which we tried to kill with stones."

"See, he has hidden the viper in his bosom. Take it from him!"

"Kill him!" screamed the others.

But now a number of soldiers came up, and procured respect for their
Queen, pushing back the Italians, and forming a circle round the
wounded man.

Aspa looked at the latter attentively, and suddenly cast herself down
beside him, crossing her arms on her bosom.

"What is the matter, Aspa? Rise!" said her mistress, much astonished.

"Oh, mistress!" stammered Aspa, "the man is no Gaul! He is one of my
people. He prays to the Snake-God. Look at his brown skin--as brown as
Aspa's! And here--here is writing; letters are tattooed upon his
breast; the sacred hieroglyphics of my country!" she cried with
delight.

And, pointing with her finger, she began to read.

"Why this disguise?" asked Mataswintha. "It is suspicious. He must be
arrested."

"No, no, mistress," whispered Aspa; "dost thou know what these letters
mean? No other eye than mine can decipher them for thee."

"Well?" asked Mataswintha.

"They say," whispered Aspa, "Syphax owes a life to his master, Cethegus
the Prefect.' Yes, yes, I know him; it is Syphax, the son of Hiempsal,
a friend of my family. The gods have sent him to us."

"Yes, Aspa," said Mataswintha, "the gods have sent him: the gods of
revenge! Goths, lay this wounded man upon a bier, and follow my slave
to the palace. Henceforward he shall be employed in my service."



                              CHAPTER IV.

A few days later Mataswintha again repaired to the camp, this time
unaccompanied by Aspa, for the latter never stirred, by day or night,
from the bedside of her wounded countryman, who was rapidly recovering
under her careful nursing.

King Witichis himself came to fetch the Queen with all his court, for a
most important council of war was to be held in his tent. The arrival
of the last reinforcements had been reported, and Guntharis and
Hildebad were also expected to return with the reply of Belisarius to
the proposal of peace.

"This will be a fateful day," said Witichis to his consort. "Pray to
Heaven for peace."

"I pray for war," said Mataswintha, with a fixed stare.

"Does thy woman's heart so long for revenge?"

"For revenge alone, and it will be mine!"

They entered the tent, which was already crowded with Gothic leaders.

Mataswintha returned their reverent greetings with a haughty bend of
her neck.

"Are the ambassadors here?" the King asked old Hildebrand, as he seated
himself. "Then bring them in."

At a sign from the old man, the curtains at the side of the tent were
withdrawn, and Duke Guntharis and Hildebad entered, bowing low.

"What bring you, peace or war?" Witichis asked eagerly.

"War! war, King Witichis!" cried both men with one voice.

"What! Belisarius refuses the sacrifice I offered him? Hast thou
communicated my proposal to him in a friendly and earnest manner?"

Duke Guntharis stepped forward and answered:

"I met the commander in the Capitol, as the guest of the Prefect, and I
said to him: 'The Gothic King, Witichis, sends thee greeting. In thirty
days he will march before these walls with a hundred and fifty thousand
valiant Goths, and there will be a strife and struggle for this
venerable city, such as her bloodstained soil has not witnessed for a
thousand years. The King of the Goths loves peace even more than
victory, and he swears to yield the island of Sicilia to the Emperor
Justinian, and stand by him in every war with thirty thousand Goths, if
you will at once evacuate Rome and Italy, which belong to us by right
of conquest, as well as according to the treaty with Emperor Zeno, who
conceded them to Theodoric when he had overthrown Odoacer.' Thus I
spoke, according to thy command. But Belisarius laughed, and cried:
'Witichis is very kind to yield to me the island of Sicilia, which
belongs to me already, and is no more his. I will give him instead the
island of Thule! No. The treaty of Theodoric with Zeno was a forced
one, and as to the right of conquest--well, that speaks now for us. No
peace except upon these conditions: that the whole Gothic army lay down
their arms, and the entire nation march over the Alps, sending their
King and Queen as hostages to Byzantium.'"

A murmur of indignation ran through the tent.

"Without making any reply to such a proposition," continued Guntharis,
"we turned our backs angrily and departed. 'We shall meet again in
Ravenna!' Belisarius cried after us."

"Then I turned," added Hildebad, "and cried: 'We shall meet again
before Rome!' Up, King Witichis! to arms! Thou hast done thine utmost
for peace, and hast only reaped humiliation. Up, then! Long enough hast
thou lingered and prepared; lead us now to battle!"

Just then a flourish of trumpets was heard in the camp, followed by the
sound of the hoof-beats of approaching horses.

Presently the curtain of the tent was lifted, and Totila entered in his
shining armour, his white mantle floating round him.

"Hail, my King and my Queen!" he said, bowing, "My mission is
fulfilled, I bring you the friendly greeting of the Frank King. He had
an army ready for the service of Byzantium, and prepared to attack
thee. I succeeded in changing his intentions. His army will not enter
Italy against the Goths. Duke Markja of Mediolanum, who, until now, has
defended the Cottian Alps against the Franks, is therefore free. He
follows me in haste with all his thousands. On my way hither I gathered
together whatever men I found capable of bearing arms, and also the
garrisons of the fortresses. Further: until now we were short of
cavalry. Be comforted, my King! I bring thee six thousand horsemen,
splendidly mounted. They long to caper upon the plains of Rome. _One_
wish alone dwells in all our hearts: lead us to battle, to Rome!"

"Thanks, my friend, to thee and to thy horsemen! Speak, Hildebrand, how
is the army now divided? Tell me, generals, how many men does each one
of you command? Notaries, write the numbers down."

"I command three thousand foot-soldiers," cried Hildebad.

"And I forty thousand foot and horse with shield and spear," said Duke
Guntharis.

"I lead forty thousand foot: archers, slingers, and spear-bearers,"
said Earl Grippa of Ravenna.

"I seven thousand with knives and clubs," counted Hildebrand.

"Then come Totila's six thousand horse, and fourteen selected thousands
led by Teja, with battle-axes--where is he? I miss him here--and I have
raised the number of my troops, foot and horse, to fifty thousand,"
concluded the King.

"Altogether that makes a hundred and sixty thousand," said the
protonotary, writing down the numbers, and handing the parchment to the
King.

A ray of warlike joy and exultation spread over the face of Witichis.

"A hundred and sixty thousand Gothic warriors! Belisarius, shall they
lay down their arms before thee without a struggle?--What repose do you
need before the march?"

Just then Teja hurried into the tent. As he entered he caught the last
question. His eyes flashed; he trembled with rage.

"Repose? not an hour longer; up! revenge, King Witichis! a monstrous
crime has been committed, which cries to Heaven for vengeance. Lead us
at once to battle!"

"What has happened?"

"One of Belisarius's generals, the Hun Ambazuch, besieged, as thou
knowest, the fortress of Petra with his Huns and Armenians. There was
no relief for the garrison far and near. Only young Earl Arahad--he
surely sought death--attacked the superior force with his small troop;
he fell in brave combat. The little company of armed Goths in the
fortress resisted desperately, for all the helpless people of the
Goths, the Aged, the sick, women and children, coming from the plains
of Tuscany, Valeria, and Picenum, and amounting to some thousands, had
taken refuge in the fortress from the enemy. At last famine compelled
them to open the gates, with the stipulation that they should be
allowed to leave unhurt. The Hun swore that he would not allow a drop
of Gothic blood to be shed. He entered, and ordered the Goths to
assemble in the Great Basilica of St. Zeno. This they did, above five
thousand people and a few hundred warriors. And when they were all
assembled----"

Teja paused with a shudder.

"Well?" asked Mataswintha, turning pale.

"The Hun closed the doors, surrounded the church with his troops--and
burnt all the five thousand, together with the church."

"And his promise!" cried Witichis.

"Yes, so cried the desperate people amidst the smoke and flames! 'My
promise?' laughed the Hun, 'it will be fulfilled: not a drop of blood
will be shed. The Goths must be burnt out of Italy, like field-mice and
vermin.' And so the Byzantines looked on, while five thousand Goths,
aged men, women, sick people, and children--King Witichis, dost thou
hear?--_children_! were miserably suffocated and burnt to death! Such
things happen, and thou--thou sendest offers of peace! Up, King
Witichis!" cried the enraged man, drawing his sword. "If thou be a man,
set forth at once to revenge thy people! The spirits of the murdered
will march before us. Lead us to battle! Lead us to revenge!"

"Lead us to battle! lead us to revenge!" echoed the Goths with a shout.

Witichis rose with quiet majesty.

"So be it! the extremity has been reached. And our best armour is our
right. To arms!"

And he gave the parchment, which he held in his hand, to Mataswintha,
in order to take up the blue banner which hung over his chair.

"You see this old banner of Theodoric; he has carried it from victory
to victory. It is now, alas, in weaker hands than his; but do not be
discouraged. You know well that a foolish confidence is not in my
nature, but this time I tell you beforehand that a present victory
rustles in the folds of this flag--a great, proud, and avenging
victory! Follow me! The army will march at once. Generals, order your
troops. To Rome!"

"To Rome!" was echoed through the tent. "To Rome!"



                               CHAPTER V.

In the meantime Belisarius prepared to leave the city of Rome with his
main army, and during his absence he entrusted his command to Johannes.

He had resolved to attack the Goths in Ravenna.

His unchecked and victorious march, and the successes of his advanced
troops of skirmishers--who, through the revolt of the Italians, had won
all the fortresses, castles, and towns till within a short distance of
Ravenna--had awakened in Belisarius the conviction that the campaign
would soon be ended, and that the only thing left to do was to crush
the helpless barbarians in their last strongholds.

For after Belisarius himself had won the whole southern part of the
peninsula--Bruttia, Lucania, Calabria, Apulia, and Campania--and had
afterwards occupied Rome and marched through Samnium and the Valeria,
his lieutenant-generals, Bessas and Constantinus, with his own
body-guard, commanded by the Armenian Zanter, the Persian Chanaranges,
and the Massagetian Æschman, had been sent forward to conquer Tuscany.

Bessas advanced upon the strong fortress of Narnia. For the means of
assault available at that time, this castled town was almost
impregnable. It was situated upon a high mountain, at the foot of which
runs the deep river Nar. The only two approaches to this fortress from
the east and west are a narrow pass and the old lofty and fortified
bridge erected by the Emperor Augustus.

But the Roman population overpowered the half-Gothic garrison which lay
there, and opened the gates to the Thracians of Bessas.

In the same manner, Spoletium and Perusia succumbed to Constantinus
without striking a blow.

Meanwhile another general, the Comes Sacri Stabuli Constantinus, had,
on the east coast of the Ionian Gulf, avenged the death of two
Byzantine leaders--the magister militum for Illyrium, Mundus, and his
son Mauricius, who had fallen at the beginning of the war at Solona, in
Dalmatia--had occupied Solona, and forced the scanty Gothic troops to
retreat to Ravenna.

So all Dalmatia and Liburnia had fallen into the hands of the
Byzantines.

From Tuscany, as we have seen, the Huns of Justinian were already
devastating Picenum and the country as far as the Æmilia.

Therefore Belisarius held the peace proposals of the Gothic King to be
a sign of weakness. It never occurred to him that the barbarians would
advance to the attack. At the same time, he was eager to leave Rome;
for he felt a strong repugnance to being called the guest of the
Prefect. In the open field his superiority would soon be fully
displayed.

The Prefect left the Capitol to the charge of his faithful tribune,
Lucius Licinius, and followed the march of Belisarius.

In vain he warned the latter against too great confidence.

"Remain behind the rock of the Capitol if you fear the barbarians,"
Belisarius had answered sarcastically.

"No," retorted Cethegus; "a defeat of Belisarius is too rare a
spectacle. I must not miss it."

In truth, Cethegus would have been glad to witness the humiliation of
the great general, whose fame inspired the Italians with too great
admiration.

Belisarius had led his troops out of the northern gate of the city, and
had pitched a camp at a few miles distant, in order to hold a review
and make a new division of the army, which was the more necessary as
the influx of Italians who hastened to join his flag was very great.

He had also recalled Bessas, Constantinus, and Ambazuch, with the
greater part of their troops. They had only left a small portion behind
them to garrison the towns which they had conquered.

Vague rumours of the approach of a Gothic army had spread in the camp.
But Belisarius would not believe them.

"They dare not come," he replied to Procopius's warnings; "they lie in
Ravenna and tremble before Belisarius."

Late at night Cethegus lay sleepless upon his coach in his tent. He had
left the lamp burning.

"I cannot sleep," he said to himself. "There is a sound of clashing
arms in the air, and an odour of blood. The Goths are coming; they are
most surely marching down through the Sabine mountains, on the Via
Casperia and Salara."

On a sudden the curtain of his tent was pushed back, and Syphax rushed
up to his couch breathless.

"I know," cried Cethegus, springing up, "what you come to announce--the
Goths are coming!"

"Yes, master; to-morrow they will be here. They advance upon the
Salarian Gate. I had the Queen's best horse; but this Totila, who leads
the vanguard, rushes like the wind over the desert, and here in the
camp no one has any suspicion."

"The great general," laughed Cethegus, "has placed no outposts on the
watch."

"He relied upon the solid tower on the bridge over the Anius,[1]
but----"

"Well, the tower is safe?"

"Yes; but the garrison--Roman citizens from Neapolis--at once went over
to the Goths when young Totila appeared. The body-guards of Belisarius,
who tried to stop them, were taken prisoners and delivered up to
Totila; the tower and the bridge are in the hands of the Goths."

"Things are going on well! Have you any idea of the strength of the
enemy?"

"Not merely an idea; I know it as exactly as Witichis himself. Here is
the list of their troops; Mataswintha, their Queen, sends it to you."

Cethegus looked at him inquiringly.

"Do miracles take place to further the ruin of the Goths?"

"Yes, master, miracles! This lovely woman desires the ruin of her
people, to revenge herself on one man. And this man is her husband!"

"You are mistaken," cried Cethegus. "She loved him from childhood, and
even bought his bust."

"Yes, and she loves him still. But he loves not her; and the bust of
Mars was shattered on the night of her marriage."

"She cannot have told you all this herself?"

"No; but Aspa, my countrywoman and her slave, told me all. She loves
me; and she loves her mistress almost as much as I my master.
Mataswintha wishes you to aid in the destruction of the kingdom of the
Goths. She will write, through Aspa, in the secret cypher of my race.
And if I were Cethegus, I would take this sun-like Queen to my wife."

"I too, if I were Syphax. But your message deserves a crown! A
revengeful and cunning woman is worth more than legions! Now I
defy you, Belisarius, Witichis, and Justinian! Ask a favour,
Syphax--anything except your freedom, for I need you yet."

"My freedom is--to serve you. _One_ favour--let me fight at your side
to-morrow?"

"No, my beautiful panther; I do not need your claws--only your stealthy
step. You will keep silence about the vicinity and strength of the
Goths. Help me on with my armour, and give me the plan of the Salarian
road out of that casket. Now call Marcus Licinius, and the leader of my
Isaurians, Sandil."

Syphax disappeared.

Cethegus cast a look at the plan.

"So they come from the north-west, down the hill. Woe to him who shall
try to stop them there. Then comes the deep valley in which we are
encamped. Here the battle will be fought and lost. Behind us, to the
south-east, our position lies along a deep brook; into this we shall be
inevitably thrown--the bridges cannot be defended. Then a stretch of
flat country. What a fine field for the horsemen to pursue us! Finally,
still farther back, a dense wood and a narrow pass with the ruined
Castle of Hadrian. Marcus," he cried, as the latter entered the tent,
"my troops will march at once. We shall go down along the brook into
the wood; and you will tell whoever questions you that we march back to
Rome."

"March home, without fighting!" asked Marcus, astonished. "You surely
know that a battle is pending?"

"Just for that very reason!"

And with these words Cethegus departed to wake Belisarius in his tent.

But he found him already up. Procopius stood near him.

"Do you know already. Prefect?" said Belisarius. "Fugitive country
people say that a troop of horsemen approaches. The fools ride to their
destruction; they think the road is open as far as Rome."

And he continued to don his armour.

"But the peasants also say that the horsemen are only the vanguard. A
terrible army of barbarians follows," warned Procopius.

"Vain rumours! These Goths are afraid; Witichis dare not meet me. I
have protected the bridge over the Anio with a tower, fourteen miles
this side Rome; Martinus has built it after my plan. That alone will
hinder the barbarian foot-soldiers for more than a week, even should a
few hacks manage to swim across the water."

"You err, Belisarius. I know for a fact that the whole Gothic army
approaches!" said Cethegus.

"Then go home, if you fear it."

"I will take advantage of this permission. I have had fever these last
few days. And my Isaurians suffer from it also. With your leave, I will
go back to Rome."

"I know this fever," said Belisarius; "that is, I know it in others. It
passes as soon as ditches and walls are between the patient and the
enemy. Go, if you will; we need you as little as your Isaurians."

Cethegus bowed, and left the tent.

"We shall meet again, O Belisarius!" he said. "Give the signal for the
march of my Isaurians," he called loudly to Marcus; "and to my
Byzantines also," he added in a low voice.

"But Belisarius has----"

"_I_ am their Belisarius. Syphax, my horse."

As he mounted, a troop of Roman horsemen galloped up; torches were
carried before the leader.

"Who goes there? Ah! you, Cethegus! What? you ride away? Your people
march towards the river! You surely will not leave us now, in this time
of imminent danger?"

Cethegus bent forward.

"Hoho! it is you, Calpurnius? I did not recognise you; you look so
pale. What news from the front?"

"Fugitive peasants say," answered Calpurnius anxiously, "that there are
certainly more than a party of skirmishers. The King of the barbarians,
Witichis himself, is on the march through the Sabine mountains. They
have already reached the left bank of the Tiber. Resistance, then, is
madness--destruction. I follow you; I will join your march."

"No," said Cethegus harshly; "you know that I am superstitious. I do
not like to ride with men who are doomed to the Furies. The punishment
for your cowardly murder of that boy will surely overtake you. I have
no desire to share it with you."

"Yet voices in Rome whisper that Cethegus, too, does not shun an
opportune murder," answered Calpurnius angrily.

"Calpurnius is not Cethegus," retorted the Prefect, as he proudly
pranced away. "Meanwhile, greet Hades for me," he added.



                              CHAPTER VI.

"Cursed omen!" growled Calpurnius.

And he hastened to join Belisarius.

"Command the retreat, quick, magister militum!"

"Why, excellent Calpurnius?"

"It is the King of the Goths himself!"

"And I am Belisarius himself," answered the latter, as he donned his
splendid helmet with its crest of white horse-hair. "How dare you leave
your post in the vanguard?"

"I wished to bring you the news, general."

"Could no other messenger do that? Listen, Roman, you are unworthy of
being liberated. You tremble, you coward heart! Return at once to the
front. You will lead our horsemen to the first attack. You, Antallas
and Kuturgur, take him between you. He _must_ be brave; do you hear? If
he shrink--down with him. Thus Romans must be taught courage! The
watchman has just announced the last hour of night. In another hour the
sun will rise. Its first beams must find the whole army on yonder
hills. Up! Ambuzach, Bessas, Constantinus, Demetrius, advance to meet
the enemy!"

"General, it is as they say," announced Maxentius, the most faithful of
the lifeguards; "innumerable Goths are advancing."

"There are two armies against us," reported Salomo, the leader of the
hypaspistes of Belisarius.

"I reckon Belisarius alone to be a whole army."

"And the plan of attack?" asked Bessas.

"That I will decide upon when in sight of the enemy, while Calpurnius
arrests their progress with his horsemen. Forward! Give the signal.
Bring Phalion out!"

He left the tent. His generals, hypaspistes, pretorians, captains and
lifeguards dispersed in all directions, in order to muster their men.

In a quarter of an hour the whole army was in motion towards the hills.

No time was lost in breaking up the camp, and the sudden movement
caused endless confusion.

Foot and horse got mingled together in the dark and moonless night. And
rumours of the superiority of the advancing barbarians had also spread
discouragement among the soldiers.

Two rather narrow roads alone led to the hills, which circumstance
caused much hindrance, and blocking of the way.

Far later than the hour appointed by Belisarius, the army arrived in
sight of the hills; and when the first beams of the sun shone upon
them, Calpurnius, the leader of the vanguard, saw Gothic weapons
glittering upon all the heights. The barbarians had been beforehand
with Belisarius.

Alarmed, Calpurnius halted, and sent word to the commander-in-chief.

Belisarius plainly saw that Calpurnius and his horsemen could not storm
the hills. He therefore gave orders that Ambazuch and Bessas, with the
best of the Armenian foot-soldiers, should advance upon the broader
road. The right and left wings of the army were led by Constantinus and
Demetrius; he himself led up his body-guard as a reserve for the
centre.

Calpurnius, rejoiced at the change of plan, placed his horsemen below
the steepest part of a hill, where he thought himself safe from an
attack, and waited for the result of the movements of Ambazuch and
Bessas, in order to pursue the flying Goths or support the retreating
Armenians according to circumstances.

On the summit of the heights the Goths placed themselves in an extended
line of battle.

Totila's horsemen had arrived the first; he was soon joined by Teja,
mounted and feverish with thirst for battle. The axe-bearing foot were
far behind, for Teja had begged permission to join in the hand-to-hand
fight when and where he pleased.

Hildebrand followed later; and lastly the King with the main army.

Duke Guntharis, with his own and Teja's men, was expected to arrive
shortly.

Swift as an arrow Teja flew back to the King.

"King," he cried, "beneath yonder hill stands Belisarius. By the God of
Revenge, he is lost! He has been mad enough to advance. Do not suffer
him to be beforehand with us in the attack."

"Forward!" cried King Witichis; "the Goths to the front!"

In a moment he had reached the edge of the hill and overlooked the
valley at his feet.

"Hildebad--the left wing! Thou, Totila, wilt charge in the centre with
thy horsemen down that road. I shall keep the right, ready to follow or
cover thee."

"That will be needless," said Totila, drawing his sword. "I warrant
that they will not be able to withstand my charge down that hill."

"We shall drive the enemy back to the camp, take it, and force them
into that shining brook just behind. Those who still remain, Totila and
Teja, you will drive over the plain to Rome."

"Yes, when we have won the pass in those wood-crowned hills just beyond
the river," said Teja, pointing with his sword as he spoke.

"It appears to be unoccupied; you must reach it before the fugitives,"
said Witichis.

Just then the standard-bearer. Earl Wisand of Vulsinii, rode up to the
King.

"King, thou hast promised to grant me a request."

"Yes, because at Solona, thou overthrewest the magister militum for
Illyrium, Mundus, and his son."

"I have a grudge against all magistri militum. I should like to try the
same spear on Belisarius. Relieve me of my banner to-day, and allow me
to seek the magister militum. He has a celebrated charger, Phalion or
Balion, and my horse is getting stiff. And thou knowest the ancient
right of a Gothic horseman. 'Throw the rider and take his horse.'"

"A good old Gothic right," cried old Hildebrand.

"I cannot refuse thy request," said Witichis, taking the flag from the
hand of Wisand, who at once galloped away.

"Guntharis is not here. Totila, thou shalt bear the banner to-day."

"King," said Totila, "I cannot carry it if I am to show my horsemen the
way to the enemy."

Witichis signed to Teja.

"Forgive me," said Teja, "to-day I need both hands."

"Well then, Hildebad!"

"Many thanks for the honour; but I do not intend to do worse than the
others."

"What?" cried Witichis, almost angry; "must I be my own
standard-bearer? Will none of my friends honour my trust?"

"Give me the flag of Theodoric," said old Hildebrand, grasping the
mighty shaft. "It pleases me that the youths so thirst for fame. Give
me the banner, I will defend it to-day as I did forty summers ago."

And from that moment he rode at the King's right hand.

"The enemy's foot are advancing up the hill," said Witichis, raising
himself in the saddle.

"They are Huns and Armenians," said Teja, looking forward with his
eagle-eyes, "I recognise their long shields!" And spurring his horse,
he cried: "And Ambazuch, the perjured murderer of Petra, leads them."

"Forward, Totila!" cried the King; "and of _these_ troops--make no
prisoners!"

Totila rapidly galloped off to his horsemen, who were placed at the top
of the steep road which led down the hill. He carefully examined the
armour of the Armenians, who were slowly advancing up the ascent in
close columns. They carried very long and heavy shields, and short
spears for thrusting and throwing.

"They must not have time to hurl their spears," cried Totila.

He then ordered his horsemen, at the moment of encountering the enemy,
to change their lances from their right hand to their left, letting
their bridles hang loosely from the wrist, and passing their lances
across the manes of their horses into the bridle hand. In this way they
would hit the enemy on their unprotected side.

"As soon as the encounter has taken place--they will not be able to
withstand it--throw your lances back into the arm-strap, draw your
swords, and kill whoever still stands."

He now placed his men in the shape of a wedge on the road and on each
side of it, outflanking the enemy's column. He himself led the thin
edge of the wedge. He determined to allow the enemy to ascend halfway
up the hill.

Both parties looked forward to the shock in breathless expectation.

Ambazuch, an experienced warrior, quietly marched forward.

"Let them come on," he said to his people, "until you feel their
horses' breath upon your faces. Then, and not before, hurl your lances.
Aim low, at the breasts of the horses, and immediately after draw your
swords. In this way I have always succeeded in overthrowing horsemen."

But it turned out otherwise.

For when Totila gave the order to charge, it seemed as if a thundering
avalanche were descending the hill upon the terrified enemy. The
shining, clattering, snorting, threatening mass rushed on like a
hurricane, and before the first row of the Armenians had found time
even to raise their spears, they lay upon the ground, pierced through
by the long lances. They had been swept away as if they had never stood
there.

All this had taken place in a moment of time; and when Ambazuch was
about to order his second line, in which he himself stood, to kneel and
shorten their spears, he found it already ridden over; the third rank
dispersed; and the fourth, under Bessas, able to offer but a faint
resistance to the terrible horsemen, who now began to draw their
swords.

He tried to rally his men; he flew back and called to his wavering
lines to stand and fight; but just then Totila's sword reached him; a
mighty stroke crushed in his helmet.

He fell on his knees, and held the hilt of his sword towards the Goth.

"Take a ransom!" he cried. "I am yours!"

Totila was about to stretch forth his hand to take the sword, when Teja
cried:

"Remember Petra!"

A weapon flashed, and Ambazuch sank dead on the ground.

At this the last lines of the Armenians, carrying Bessas away with
them, fled in terror. Belisarius's vanguard was annihilated.

With loud cries of joy King Witichis and his followers had witnessed
Totila's victory.

"Look! now the Hunnish horsemen, who stand just below us, advance
against Totila," said the King to the old standard-bearer. "Totila
turns to meet them. They are much more numerous. Up, Hildebad! Hasten
down the road to his aid."

"Ha!" cried old Hildebrand, bending forward in his saddle, and looking
over the edge of the rocks, "who is that tribune between the two
body-guards of Belisarius?"

Witichis bent forward also.

"Calpurnius!" he exclaimed with a sharp cry.

And suddenly, seeking no path, just from where he stood, the King
galloped down the hill towards his deadly enemy. The fear that
Calpurnius might escape him overpowered every other thought.

As if on wings, as if the God of Revenge were guiding him over bush and
crevice and ditch and pointed rock, the King galloped madly on.

For an instant the old master-at-arms was horrified; such a ride he had
never beheld. But the next moment he waved his blue flag and cried:

"Forward! follow your King!"

And, the horsemen first, the foot after, the centre o£ the Gothic army,
leaping, jumping, and sliding down upon their shields, suddenly
descended the steep side of the hill upon the Hunnish cavalry.

Calpurnius had looked up. It had seemed to him as if he heard his name,
and the cry sounded like the last trump of judgment.

He turned, and would have fled.

But the grim soldiers on his right and left caught his bridle.

"Halt, tribune!" said Antallas, pointing to Totila's horsemen--"_there_
is the enemy!"

A cry of pain to the left caused him and Calpurnius to turn. The Hun
Kuturgur, the second of the body-guards, sank with a crash from his
saddle, felled by the sword-stroke of a Goth who appeared to have
dropped from the sky. And behind this Goth, the rocky steep, which yet
seemed inaccessible, was filled with climbing and leaping men, and the
Huns were suddenly taken in the flank by this enemy from above, while
at the same time they were attacked in front by Totila.

Calpurnius recognised the Goth.

"Witichis!" he cried in terror, and his arm fell powerless at his side.

But his horse saved him. Wounded and startled by the fall of Kuturgur,
it galloped wildly away. Antallas threw himself furiously upon the King
of the Goths, who was far in advance of his men.

"Down, madman!" he cried.

But the next moment he was slain by Witichis, who irresistibly,
trampled down all those who stood in his path.

Through the crowd of Hunnish cavalry, who, terrified at his look,
yielded to right and left, Witichis pursued Calpurnius.

The latter had recovered the mastery of his horse, and now sought
protection in the thickest press of his soldiers.

In vain.

Witichis did not lose sight of him for a moment, but followed him
closely.

However he might hide himself among his men, however rapidly he rode,
Calpurnius could not escape the King, who beat down all who stood
between him and the murderer of his son.

Group after group, knot after knot, dissolved before the terrible sword
of the revengeful father. The lines of the Huns were broken through by
the fugitive and his pursuer. They were not able to close again, for,
even before Totila could come up, the old standard-bearer, with horse
and foot, had broken their right flank, dividing it into two parts.

When Totila galloped up, he found only flying foes. The portion to the
right was soon taken between Totila and Hildebrand, and destroyed. The
greater part on the left fled back to Belisarius.

Meantime Calpurnius galloped over the field as if pursued by the
Furies.

He had a good start, for Witichis had been seven times obliged to hew
his way through the enemy.

But Boreas galloped bravely on, and carried Witichis ever nearer to his
victim.

The fugitive heard the call to stand and fight. He only spurred his
horse the faster.

All at once it fell beneath him, and before he could rise, Witichis
stood over him.

Springing from his saddle, Witichis now silently pushed the sword of
the fallen man, which had dropped from the latter's hand, towards him.

Then Calpurnius took courage--the courage of despair.

He rose to his feet, took up his sword, and sprang at the Goth with a
leap like that of a tiger.

But in the middle of his leap he fell prone to the ground; the sword of
Witichis had split his forehead open.

The King set his foot upon the breast of the corpse, and looked into
the distorted face. He sighed deeply.

"Revenge is sweet, but it will not bring back my child!"

With deep ire Belisarius had witnessed this unhappy commencement of the
battle. But his confidence and composure did not abandon him, even when
he saw the Armenians swept away, and the horsemen of Calpurnius
overthrown and scattered.

He was now convinced of the strength and superiority of the enemy. But
he determined to advance upon his whole line, leaving a gap in which to
receive his fugitive horsemen.

But this the Goths were quick to perceive; and, Witichis foremost, they
followed Totila and Hildebrand--who had annihilated the surrounded
Huns--and pressed forward so furiously that they threatened to reach
and break through the lines of Belisarius at the same moment with the
fugitives.

This could not be permitted.

Belisarius himself filled the gap with his bodyguard on foot, and
shouted to the fugitive horsemen to halt and turn.

But it seemed as if the terror which had possessed their cowardly and
fallen leader had entered their hearts. They dreaded the sword of the
Gothic King behind them even more than their thundering chief before
them, and without pause or stay they rushed on at a gallop, as if they
intended to ride down their own comrades.

For one moment a fearful shock--a thousand-voiced cry of fear and
rage--a confused turmoil of mingled horse and foot--among them
slaughtering Goths--and suddenly a dispersal to all sides, amid shrill
cries of victory from the enemy.

The body-guard of Belisarius was ridden down; his main line of battle
broken.

He ordered the retreat to the camp.

But it was no longer a retreat, it was a rout. The footmen of Hildebad,
Guntharis, and Teja had now arrived upon the field of battle. The
Byzantines saw their order of attack broken, they despaired of further
resistance and fled in great confusion to the camp.

Notwithstanding, they would still have been able to reach it a long
time before their pursuers, had not an unforeseen occurrence stopped
the way.

Belisarius had set forth with such certainty of victory, that he had
ordered all the carriages and baggage of the army, and even the herds
of cattle--which, according to the custom of the time, were driven
after--to follow the troops upon the high-roads.

The retreating masses now encountered this slowly advancing body,
difficult to move and difficult to disperse, and indescribable
confusion ensued.

Soldiers and drivers came to blows; the order of march was broken
against the wagons, carriages, and chests. The lust of booty was
awakened, and many of the soldiers began to plunder the wagons, before
they should fall into the hands of the enemy.

On all sides arose altercations, curses, laments, and throats,
accompanied by the crash of broken wagons, and the bleating and
bellowing of the terrified herds.

"Sacrifice the baggage! Fire the wagons! Gallop through the herds!"
cried Belisarius, who, sword in hand, now broke a path through the
turmoil with the remnant of his body-guard.

But it was all in vain.

Ever thicker, ever more entangled became the coil; it seemed impossible
to unravel it.

Despair at length tore it asunder.

The cry, "The barbarians are upon us!" sounded from the rear.

And it was no idle rumour.

Hildebad, with his foot-soldiers, had descended to the plain, and his
foremost ranks now attacked the defenceless mass. There ensued a
fearful press to the front; cries of terror--of rage from the
body-guard, who, mindful of their former valour, attempted to fight,
but could not--of anguish from those trampled and crushed; and suddenly
the greater part of the wagons, with their teams and the thousands who
were crowded upon them or jammed between them, fell with a thundering
crash into the ditches on the right and left of the high-road.

So at last the way was open--and impetuously, all discipline at an end,
the stream of fugitives rushed on to the camp.

With loud cries of victory the Gothic foot-soldiers followed, slaying
their easy prey with arrows, slings, and spears; while Belisarius, in
the rear, resisted with difficulty the unceasing attacks of Totila and
the King.

"Help, Belisarius!" cried Aigan, the leader of the Massagetian
mercenaries, as he rode up from among the scattered groups, wiping the
blood from his face. "My countrymen swear they see the devil amidst the
enemy. They will not stand. Help me! Usually they fear you much more
than the devil!"

Grinding his teeth, Belisarius looked across at his right wing, which
was flying in disorder over the fallows, pursued by the Goths.

"O Justinian, my imperial master," he exclaimed, "how badly I keep my
word!"

And, entrusting the further defence of the retreat to the camp to
Demetrius--for the uneven ground upon which they had now entered
embarrassed the pursuit of the enemy's horse---he galloped across
country with Aigan and his mounted guard to join the mercenaries.

"Halt!" he thundered; "halt, you cowardly dogs! Who flies, when
Belisarius stands? I am with you; turn and win!" And he raised his
visor, and showed them his majestic countenance.

And such was the power of his personality, so great the belief in his
invincibility, that all who recognised the tall form of the commander
on his roan, hesitated, halted, and with a cry of encouragement, turned
once more to face the pursuing Goths.

Here, at least, the flight was at an end.

Up came a tremendous Goth, easily forcing his way.

"Ha, ha! I am glad you are tired of running, you swift-footed Greeks! I
could no longer pant after you! Your legs are superior to ours; let us
see if your arms be so too. Ha! why do you fall back, my lads? Because
of him on the roan? What of him?"

"Sir, that must be a King among the southerners; one can hardly bear
the glance of his angry eye."

"That would indeed be curious. Ah! that must be Belisarius! I am glad
to meet thee, thou bold hero!" he cried across to Belisarius.
"Dismount, and let us measure the strength of our arms. Look, I too am
on foot. Thou wilt not?" he cried angrily. "Must I fetch thee down from
thy hack?"

And he swung his immense spear in his right hand.

"Turn, sir, avoid him!" cried Aigan: "that giant hurls small masts!"

"Turn, general," repeated the hypaspistes anxiously.

But Belisarius, raising his short sword, rode quietly a horse's length
nearer to the Goth. Whizzing came the mighty spear, straight at his
breast.

But just before it touched, a swift stroke of his short Roman sword,
and the spear fell harmless on one side.

"Hail to Belisarius, hail!" cried the Byzantines, and they pressed
forward anew.

"A famous stroke!" laughed Hildebad angrily. "Let us see if thy fence
can parry _this_!"

And, bending forward, he lifted from the ploughed field an old jagged
boundary-stone, swung it in both hands backward and forward, lifted it
above his head, and hurled it with all his might at the advancing hero.

A cry from the Byzantines--Belisarius fell backwards from his horse.

All was over.

"Belisarius down! Woe, woe! All is lost!" cried the Byzantines, as the
tall form disappeared, and fled madly towards the camp.

A few ran on without pause until they reached the gates of Rome.

It was in vain that the lance and spear-bearers threw themselves
desperately against the Goths; they could only save their chief, but
not the battle.

The first sword-stroke of Hildebad, who now rushed up to Belisarius,
was received on the faithful breast of Maxentius. But also a Gothic
horseman, who was the next to reach the place, and who had killed seven
men before he could make his way to the magister militum, fell from his
horse. His followers found him pierced by thirteen wounds. But he was
still alive, and he was one of the few who fought through and outlived
the whole war--Wisand, the bandelarius.

Belisarius, who, lifted on to his horse by Aigan and Valentinus, his
groom, had quickly recovered his senses, raised his general's staff in
vain, and cried to the fugitives to stand. They could not and would not
hear. In vain he struck at them right and left; he was irresistibly
carried away by the press to the very camp.

There, behind the solid gates, he at last succeeded in arresting the
pursuit of the Goths.

"All honour is lost," he said indignantly; "let us at least save our
lives."

With these words he closed the gates, without any regard to the large
masses of people still outside.

An attempt of Hildebad to enter the camp without more ado was
frustrated by the strong oaken palisades, which defied the spears and
stones hurled at them.

Leaning on his sword, Hildebad cooled himself for a moment. Just then
Teja, who, like the King and Totila, had long since dismounted, turned
the corner of the wall, which he had been examining and measuring.

"This confounded wooden fortress!" cried Hildebad, as Teja came up.
"Neither stone nor iron can do any good here."

"No," said Teja; "but fire can!"

He stirred with his foot a heap of ashes which lay near.

"These are from last night's watch-fires. Here are still some sparks,
and brushwood lies near. Come, my men, put up your swords and kindle
the brushwood. Set the camp on fire!"

"Splendid fellow!" cried Hildebad rejoicingly. "Quick, lads! burn them
out as you would a fox in his hole! The brisk north wind will help us!"

The dying watch-fires were speedily fanned into flame; hundreds of
fire-brands flew into the dry planks of the palisading.

Very soon bright flames rose to the sky.

The thick smoke, driven into the camp by the wind, blinded the
Byzantines, and rendered the defence of the walls impossible. They
retreated to the centre of the camp.

"Oh that I were dead!" sighed Belisarius. "Evacuate the camp! Out by
the Porta Decumana! Retreat in good order to the bridges behind us!"

But the command to leave the camp broke the last ties of discipline and
order.

While the charred beams of the gate fell under the thundering strokes
of Teja's axe, and the Black Earl was the first to spring into the camp
through the flames and smoke, the fugitives tore open all the gates
which led to Rome, and hastened in confused masses to the river.

The first comers reached the two bridges unhindered and unfollowed.
They had some time to spare before Hildebad and Teja could compel
Belisarius to leave the burning camp.

But suddenly--oh, horror!--the Gothic horns sounded close at hand.

Witichis and Totila, as soon as they knew that the camp was taken, had
mounted at once, and now led their horsemen from the right and left, to
attack the fugitives in the flank.

Belisarius had just galloped out of the camp by the Decumanian Gate,
and was hurrying to one of the bridges, when he saw the threatening
troops of horsemen rushing up on both sides.

The great general still preserved his composure.

"Forwards at a gallop to the bridges!" he commanded his Saracens;
"defend them!"

It was too late. A dull crash; then a second--the two narrow
bridges had broken beneath the weight of the crowding fugitives,
and by hundreds the Hunnish horsemen and the Illyrian
lance-bearers--Justinian's pride--fell into the marshy waters.

Without reflecting, Belisarius, who had just reached the steep bank,
spurred his horse into the foaming blood-flecked river, and swam to the
other side.

"Salomo," he said to one of his pretorians, as soon as he had landed,
"take a handful of my guards and gallop as hard as you can to the pass.
Ride over the fugitives; you must reach it before the Goths! Do you
hear? You _must_! It is our last plank of salvation!"

Salomo and Dagisthæos obeyed, and galloped away as swift as the wind.

Belisarius collected together all whom he could reach. The Goths, as
well as the Byzantines, were detained for a time by the river.

But suddenly Aigan cried:

"Salomo is returning!"

"General," cried Salomo, as he galloped up, "all is lost! Weapons
glitter in the pass! It is already occupied by the Goths!"

For the first time on this unhappy day Belisarius started.

"The pass lost? Then not a man of my Emperor's army will escape. Then
farewell fame, Antonina, and life! Come, Aigan, draw your sword; let me
not fall living into the hands of the barbarians."

"General," said Aigan, "I have never heard you speak thus!"

"I have never before felt thus. Let us dismount and die!"

He was taking his left foot out of the stirrup, in order to spring from
his horse, when Dagisthæos galloped up.

"Be comforted, my general! The pass is ours--it is Roman weapons that
we saw there. It is Cethegus, the Prefect; he occupied the pass in
secret!"

"Cethegus?" cried Belisarius. "Is it possible? Is it certain?"

"Yes, my general. Look! It was high time!"

It was indeed. For a troop of Gothic horsemen, sent by King Witichis,
had arrived at the pass, crossing the river by a ford, before the
fugitives. But just as they were about to enter it, Cethegus, at the
head of his Illyrians, broke out of his ambush, and, after a short
combat, drove back the surprised Goths.

"The first gleam of victory on this black day!" cried Belisarius. "Up!
to the pass!"

And, in better order than before, the commander led his newly-rallied
troops to the woody hill.

"Welcome to safety, Belisarius," cried Cethegus, as he cleansed the
blade of his sword. "I have waited for you here since daybreak. I was
sure that you would come."

"Prefect of Rome," said Belisarius, reaching out his hand, as he sat on
his horse, "you have saved the Emperor's army, which I had lost. I
thank you!"

The Prefect's fresh troops stood in the pass like an impenetrable wall,
allowing the scattered Byzantines to pass, and repelling without
difficulty the attacks of the first fatigued pursuers, who pressed
forward over the river.

At the close of day. King Witichis withdrew his troops to pass the
night on the conquered field, while Belisarius and his generals, at the
back of the pass, mustered, as well as they could, the scattered
remnants of the army as they arrived, singly or in groups.

As soon as Belisarius had once more a few thousand men together, he
rode up to Cethegus, and said:

"What think you, Prefect of Rome? Your men are still fresh, and mine
have yet to blunt their weapons. Let us sally forth once more, and turn
the fortune of this day. The sun will not set yet awhile."

Cethegus looked at him with astonishment, and quoted Homer's words:

"'Truly thou hast spoken a terrible word, thou mighty one!' You
never-to-be-satisfied man! Is it so hard for you to leave a
battle-field without victory? No, Belisarius. There beckon the ramparts
of Rome. Thither lead your harassed men. I will keep the pass until you
have reached the city; and I shall be glad if I can succeed in doing
so."

And so it was arranged. Under such circumstances Belisarius was less
than ever able to oppose the will of the Prefect. So he yielded, and
led his army back to Rome, where he arrived at nightfall.

For a long time he was refused admittance; for, covered with dust and
blood, it was difficult to recognise him, and many fugitives had
brought word from the field of battle that the commander had fallen,
and that all was lost.

At last Antonina, who waited anxiously upon the walls, recognised her
husband.

He was admitted at the Pincian Gate, which was afterwards named Porta
Belisaria.

Beacons on the walls, between the Flaminian and Pincian Grates,
announced his entrance to Cethegus, who then, under cover of night,
accomplished his retreat in good order, scarcely followed by the
wearied victors.

Teja alone, with a few of his horsemen, pressed forward to the hilly
country, where the Villa Borghese is now situated, and as far as the
Aqua Acetosa.



                              CHAPTER VII.

The following day the immense army of the Goths appeared before the
walls of the Eternal City, which it surrounded in seven camps.

And now began that memorable siege, which was to develop the military
talent and inventive genius of Belisarius no less than the courage of
the besiegers.

The citizens of Rome had with consternation beheld from the walls the
interminable march of the Goths.

"Look, Prefect, they outflank all your walls."

"Yes, in breadth! but in height? They cannot get over them without
wings."

Witichis had left only two thousand men behind in Ravenna; eight
thousand he had sent, under Earl Uligis of Urbssalvia, and Earl Ansa of
Asculum, to Dalmatia, to wrest that province and Liburnia from the
Byzantines, and to reconquer the strong fortress of Salona. These
troops were to be reinforced by mercenaries recruited in Savia.

The Gothic fleet--against Teja's advice--was also to repair thither,
and not to Portus, the harbour of Rome.

But the King now surrounded, with a hundred and fifty thousand
warriors, the city of Rome and its far-stretching ramparts, the walls
of Aurelian and the Prefect.

Rome had at that time fifteen principal gates and a few smaller ones.

The weaker part of the ramparts--the space between the Flaminian Gate
in the north (on the east of the present Porta del Popolo) to the
Prænestinian Gate--was completely surrounded by six camps, thus: the
walls from the Flaminian Gate eastwards as far as the Pincian and
Salarian Gates; then to the Nomentanian Gate (south-east of Porta Pia);
farther towards the "closed gate," or Porta Clausa; and finally
southwards, the Tiburtinian (now Porta San Lorenzo), the Asinarian,
Metronian, and Latin Gates (on the Via Latina), the Appian Gate (on the
Via Appia), and the St. Paul's Gate, which lay close to the Tiber.

These six camps were erected on the left bank of the river.

But in order to prevent the besieged from destroying the Milvian
Bridge, and thus cutting off the way across the river and the whole
district from the right bank as far as the sea, the Goths erected a
seventh camp upon the right bank of the Tiber, on the "field of Nero,"
which reached from the Vatican Hill nearly to the Milvian Bridge (under
Monte Mario).

So this bridge was dominated, and that of Hadrian threatened, by a
Gothic camp, as well as the road to the city through the "Porta Sancti
Petri," as the inner Aurelian Gate, according to Procopius, was already
called at that time.

It was the entrance nearest to the Mausoleum of Hadrian.

But also the gate of St. Pancratius, on the right bank of the river,
was especially watched by the Goths.

This camp upon the field of Nero, between the Pancratian and Peter's
Gates, had been assigned to Earl Markja of Mediolanum, who had been
recalled from the Cottian Alps. But the King himself often repaired
thither in order to examine the Mausoleum. He had undertaken the
command of no particular camp, reserving to himself the general
supervision; and he had divided the other six camps between Hildebrand,
Totila, Hildebad, Teja, Guntharis, and Grippa.

He caused each of the seven camps to be surrounded with a deep moat,
throwing up the excavated earth in high banks between the moat and
camp, and strengthening them with stout palisades, as a protection
against sallies from the city.

Belisarius and Cethegus also divided their generals and their men
according to the sections and gates of Rome.

Belisarius confided the defence of the Prænestinian Gate in the eastern
quarter (now Porta Maggiore) to Bessas, and the important Flaminian
Gate, close to which lay the camp of Totila, to Constantinus, who
caused it to be almost closed with blocks of marble, taken from ancient
temples and palaces.

The Prefect jealously kept the western and southern quarters of
the city under his own strict surveillance, but in the north
Belisarius settled down between the Flaminian and Pincian--or now
"Belisarian"--Gates (the weakest part of the ramparts), and formed
plans of sallies against the barbarians.

The remaining gates were entrusted to the leaders of the foot-soldiers:
Piranius, Magnus, Ennes, Artabanes, Azarethas, and Chilbudius.

The Prefect had undertaken the defence of all the gates on the right
bank of the Tiber; the new Porta Aurelia on the Ælisian Bridge near the
Mausoleum, the Porta Septimiana, the old Aurelian Gate, which was now
named the Pancratian; and on the left bank, that of St. Paul.

The next gate to the east, the Ardeatinian, was again under the
protection of a Byzantine garrison, commanded by Chilbudius.

The besiegers and the besieged proved themselves equally indefatigable
and equally inventive in plans of attack and defence.

For a long time the only thing the Goths could attempt was to harass
the Romans before storming the walls. On their side, the Romans
prepared to defend them when attacked. The Goths--lords and masters in
the Campagna--sought to distress the besieged by cutting off all the
fourteen splendid aqueducts which supplied the city with water.

As soon as Belisarius learned this fact, he hastened to block the
mouths of the aqueducts within the city.

"For," Procopius had said to him, "since you, O great hero, Belisarius,
have crept into Neapolis through such a water-runnel, the same idea
might occur to the barbarians, and they would scarcely think it a shame
to crawl into Rome by a similar hero-path."

The besieged were now obliged to deny themselves the luxury of their
baths; the wells in the quarters of the city at a distance from the
river scarcely sufficed for drinking water.

But by cutting off the supply of water, the barbarians had also
deprived the Romans of bread.

At least it seemed so, for all the water-mills of Rome were stopped.

The garnered grain bought in Sicily by Cethegus, and that which
Belisarius had, by force, caused to be brought into Rome from all the
neighbouring country, in spite of the outcry of farmers and husbandmen,
could no longer be ground.

"Let the mills be turned by asses and oxen!" cried Belisarius.

"Most of the asses and oxen were too wise to allow themselves to be
shut up with us here, O Belisarius," said Procopius; "we have only as
many as we shall want for the shambles, and it is impossible that they
should first drive the mills and then be still fat enough to afford
meat to eat with the bread thus gained."

"Then call Martinus. Yesterday, as I stood by the Tiber counting the
Gothic tents, I had an idea----"

"Which Martinus must translate from the Belisarian into the possible!
Poor man! But I will go and fetch him."

But when, on the evening of the same day, Belisarius and Martinus
caused the first boat-mills that the world had ever known to be erected
in the Tiber, by means of boats ranged one near the other, Procopius
said admiringly:

"The bread of these boat-mills will rejoice men longer than your
greatest deeds. Flour, ground in this wise, savours of immortality."

And indeed these boat-mills, imagined by Belisarius and practically
carried out by Martinus, fully compensated to the besieged, during the
whole siege, for the loss of the powerless water-mills.

Behind the bridge which is now called Ponte San Sisto, on the flat of
the Janiculum, Belisarius caused two boats to be fastened with ropes,
and laid mills over their flat decks, so that the wheels were driven by
the river, which streamed from between the arches of the bridge with
increased force.

The besiegers, who were informed of these arrangements by deserters
from the city, soon attempted to destroy them.

They threw beams, rafts, and trees into the river above the bridge, and
in a single night all the mills were destroyed.

But Belisarius caused them to be reconstructed, and ordered strong
chains to be drawn across the river above the bridge, which caught and
arrested everything that floated down.

These iron river-bolts were not only intended to protect the mills, but
also to prevent the Goths from reaching the city on boats or rafts.

For now Witichis began to make preparations for storming the city.

He caused wooden towers, higher than the ramparts, to be built, which,
placed upon four wheels, could be drawn by oxen. Then he caused
storming-ladders to be prepared in great numbers, and four tremendous
rams or wall-breakers, which were each pushed and served by fifty men.

The deep moats were to be filled up with countless bundles of brushwood
and reeds.

To defeat these plans, Belisarius and Cethegus, the first defending the
city in the north and east, the latter in the west and south, planted
catapults and other projectile machines on the walls, which were able
to cast immense spears to a great distance, with such force that they
could pierce the strongest coat of mail.

They protected the gates by means of "wolves," that is, cross-beams set
with iron spikes, which were let crashing down upon the assaulters as
soon as the latter approached the gate.

And, lastly, they strewed innumerable caltrops and steel-traps upon the
space between the town-moats and the camp of the besiegers.



                             CHAPTER VIII.

In spite of all this, it was said by the Romans that the Goths would
long since have climbed the walls, had it not been for the Prefect's
"Egeria."

For, strange to say, each time the barbarians prepared an assault,
Cethegus went to Belisarius and warned him of the day and hour.

Whenever Teja or Hildebad attempted to carry a gate by storm or sweep
away a redoubt--Cethegus foretold their coming, and the assaulters met
with double the usual number of defenders at that particular point.

Whenever the chains across the Tiber were to be broken in a night
surprise--Cethegus seemed to have guessed it, and sent fire-brands and
fire-ships against the boats of the enemy.

So passed many months.

The Goths could not hide from themselves the fact that, in spite of
continual assaults, they had made no progress since the commencement of
the siege.

For a long time they bore with patience the betrayal and frustration of
their plans.

But by degrees discontent not only began to spread in the army,
especially as now the scarcity of provisions made itself felt, but also
the King's mind was darkened with deep melancholy when he found all his
strength, perseverance, and military science rendered vain. And when he
returned to his royal tent from some thwarted undertaking, some
abortive assault, the haughty eyes of his Queen rested on him with a
mysterious and terrible expression, from which he turned away with a
shudder.

"All has happened as I foretold," Witichis said gloomily to Teja; "with
Rauthgundis my good-fortune has forsaken me, as joy has forsaken my
heart. It is if a curse rested upon my crown. And this daughter of the
Amelungs, silent and gloomy, follows me like misfortune personified."

"Thou mayst be right," answered Teja; "perhaps I can break the spell.
Grant me leave of absence to-night."

On the same day, almost at the same hour, Johannes, in Rome, asked
Belisarius for leave of absence for that night. Belisarius refused to
grant it.

"It is no time for midnight pleasures," said he.

"It will be small pleasure to spy amongst damp old walls and Gothic
lances for a fox who is ten times slyer than either of us."

"What do you think of doing?" asked Belisarius, becoming attentive.

"What do I intend to do? To make an end of the cursed position in which
we are all placed, and you, O General, not the least. All goes well.
For months the barbarians have been encamped before these walls, and
have accomplished nothing. We shoot them as easily as boys shoot crows
from behind a hedge, and can laugh at them and all their efforts. But
who has accomplished all this? Not, as would be right, you, the
Emperor's commander-in-chief, not the Emperor's army, but this icy
Roman, who can only laugh when he scoffs. He sits up there in the
Capitol and mocks at the Emperor, the Goths and us, and most of all,
give me leave to say, at you. How does this Ulysses and Ajax in one
person know so exactly all the plans of the Goths? By means of his
demons, say some. Through his Egeria, say others. And some maintain
that he has a raven which can speak and understand like a human being,
and that he sends it every night into the Gothic camp. Old women and
Romans may believe such things, but not the son of my mother! I think I
know both the raven and the demons. It is certain that the Prefect can
only learn what he knows in the Gothic camp; let us see if we cannot
use that source as well as he."

"I thought of this long since, but I saw no possibility of carrying out
my idea."

"My Huns have watched all the Prefect's movements. It is cursedly
difficult, for his brown Moor follows him like his shadow. But
sometimes Syphax is absent for days together, and then it is easier: so
I have found out that Cethegus often leaves the city at night,
sometimes by the Gate of Portuensis, sometimes by the Gate of St. Paul.
He commands the guard of both these gates. Farther my spies dared not
follow him. But to-night--for to-night the time has come again--I have
a mind to stick to his heels. But I must wait for him _outside_ the
gate, for his Isaurians would never let me pass. I shall make a round
of the walls, and remain behind in one of the trenches."

"'Tis well. But, as you say, there are two gates to be watched."

"Yes; and so I have engaged Perseus, my brother, to be my fellow-spy.
He will watch the Gate of St. Paul, I the Portuensian Gate. You may
depend upon it, that before sunrise to-morrow one or other of us will
know who is the Prefect's Egeria."

Exactly opposite the Gate of St. Paul, at about three arrow-shots,
distance from the outermost trench of the city, lay a large and ancient
building, the Basilica Sancti Pauli extra muros, or St. Paul's outside
the walls, which only completely disappeared at the time of the siege
of Rome by the Connétable of Bourbon.

Originally a temple dedicated to Jupiter Stator, it had been
consecrated to the Apostle two centuries before the time of which we
speak, but the bronze colossal statue of the bearded god still stood
erect; only the flaming thunderbolts had been taken from its right
hand, and a crucifix put in their place; otherwise the sturdy and
bearded figure was well suited to its new name.

It was the sixth hour of the night.

The moon shone brightly above the Eternal City, and shed her silver
light upon the battlements and the plain between the Roman ramparts and
the Basilica, the black shadow of which fell towards the Gothic camp.

The guard at the Gate of St. Paul had just been relieved. But seven men
had gone out, and only six re-entered.

The seventh turned his back to the gate and walked out into the open
field.

Cautiously he chose his path: cautiously he avoided the numerous
steel-traps, covered pits and self-shooting poisoned arrows which were
strewn everywhere about, and which had already brought destruction to
many a Goth while assaulting the city.

This man appeared to know them all, and easily avoided them. He also
carefully shunned the moonlight, seeking the shade of the jutting
bastions, and springing from one tree to another.

After crossing the outermost trench, he remained standing in the shadow
of a cypress, the boughs of which, had been shattered by a catapult,
and looked about him.

He could see nothing far and near, and at once hurried with rapid steps
towards the church.

Had he looked round once more, he surely would not have done so.

For, as soon as he left the tree, a second figure rose from the trench,
and reached the shade of the cypress in three leaps.

"I have won, Johannes! This time fortune favours the younger brother!"
said this personage.

And he cautiously followed the man, who was rapidly walking on.

But suddenly he lost sight of him; it seemed as if the earth had
swallowed him up.

And when he had reached the outer wall of the church, where the man had
disappeared, the Armenian (for it was Perseus) could discover neither
door nor any other opening.

"No doubt about it," he said to himself, "the appointment has been made
within the temple. I must follow."

But at that place the wall could not be climbed.

The spy turned a corner, feeling the stones.

In vain. The wall was of the same height everywhere.

He lost about a quarter of an hour in this search.

At last he found a gap; with difficulty he squeezed himself through.

And now he found himself in the outer court of the old temple, across
which the thick Doric columns threw broad shadows, under cover of which
he succeeded in reaching the centre and principal building.

He peeped through a chink in the wall, which a current of air had
betrayed to him. Within all was dark.

But suddenly he was blinded by a dazzling light.

When he again opened his eyes, he saw a bright stripe amid the
darkness; it issued from a dark lantern, the light of which had been
suddenly uncovered.

He could distinctly see whatever stood in the line of light; but not
the bearer of the lantern.

He saw Cethegus the Prefect, who stood close to the statue of the
Apostle, and appeared to be leaning against it. In front of him stood a
second form, that of a slender woman, upon whose auburn hair fell the
glittering light of the lantern.

"The lovely Queen of the Goths, by Eros and Anteros!" said the spy to
himself. "No disagreeable meeting, be it for love or politics! Hark!
she speaks. What a pity that I came too late to hear the beginning of
the conversation!"

"Therefore, mark well," he heard the Queen say, "the day after
to-morrow some great danger is planned to take place on the road before
the Tiburtinian Gate."

"Good; but what!" asked the voice of the Prefect.

"I could learn nothing more exactly. And I can communicate nothing more
to you, even if I should hear anything. I dare not meet you here again,
for----"

She now spoke in a lower tone.

Perseus pressed his ear hard against the chink; his sword rattled
against the stone, and immediately a ray of the lantern fell upon him.

"Hark!" cried a third voice--it was a female voice, that of the bearer
of the lantern, who now showed herself in its rays as she quickly
turned in the direction of the wall where stood the spy.

Perseus recognised a slave in Moorish costume.

For one moment all in the temple were silent.

Perseus held his breath. He felt that his life was at stake. For
Cethegus grasped his sword.

"All is quiet," said the slave; "it must have been a stone falling on
the iron-work outside."

"I can also go no more into the grave outside the Portuensian Gate. I
fear that we have been followed."

"By whom?"

"By one who, as it seems, never sleeps--Earl Teja."

The Prefect's lips twitched.

"And he is also one of a secret company who have sworn an oath against
the life of Belisarius; the attack on the Gate of St. Paul will be only
a feint."

"'Tis well," said Cethegus reflectively.

"Belisarius could never escape, if he were not warned," continued the
Queen. "They lie somewhere, I fear--but I do not know where--in ambush.
They have a superior force, Earl Totila commands them."

"I will take care to warn him!" said Cethegus slowly.

"If the plan should succeed!"

"Be not anxious. Queen. Rome is not less dear to me than to you. And if
the next assault fail--they must renounce the siege, be they never so
tough. And this Queen, is your doing. Let me this night--perhaps the
last on which we meet--reveal to you my wonder and admiration. Cethegus
does not easily admire, and where he must, he does not easily confess
it. But--I admire you, Queen! With what death-despising temerity, with
what demoniac cunning you have frustrated all the plots of the
barbarians! Truly, Belisarius has done much--Cethegus more--but
Mataswintha most."

"Would that you spoke truth!" said Mataswintha with sparkling eyes.
"And if the crown falls from the head of this culprit----"

"It is _your_ hand which has decided the fate of Rome. But, Queen, you
cannot be satisfied with this alone. I have learned to know you these
last few months--you must not be taken, a conquered Gothic Queen, to
Byzantium. Such beauty, such a mind, such force of will must rule, and
not serve, in Byzantium. Therefore reflect--when your tyrant is
overthrown--will you not then follow the course which I have pointed
out to you?"

"I have never yet thought of what will follow," she answered gloomily.

"But I have thought for you. Truly, Mataswintha"--and his eyes rested
upon her with fervent admiration--"you are marvellously beautiful. I
consider it as my greatest merit that even your beauty is not able to
kindle my passions and seduce me from my plans. But you are too
beautiful, too charming, to live alone for hatred and revenge. When
our aim is reached, then to Byzantium! You will then be more than
Empress--you will be the vanquisher of the Empress!"

"When my aim is reached, my life is completed. Do you think I could
bear the thought of having destroyed my people for mere ambition, for
prudent ends? No--I did it only because I could no other. Revenge is
now all to me, and----"

Just then there sounded loud and shrill from the front of the building,
but yet within the walls, the cry of the screech-owl; once--twice--in
rapid succession.

How amazed was Perseus to see the Prefect hurriedly press his finger
upon the throat of the statue against which he was leaning, and to see
it immediately and noiselessly divide into two parts.

Cethegus slipped, into the opening, which slowly closed again.

Mataswintha and Aspa sank upon the steps of the altar, as if in prayer.

"So it was a signal! Danger is near," thought the spy. "But where is
the danger? and where the warner?"

And he turned and stepped from beneath the wall, looking to the left,
on which side the Gothic camp was situated.

But in doing so he stepped into the moonlight, and in sight of Syphax,
the Moor, who stood in an empty niche before the entrance of the
building, and who, until now, had also been looking sharply in the
direction of the camp.

From thence a man walked slowly forward.

His battle-axe glittered in the moonlight.

But Perseus saw a second weapon flash; it was the sword of the Moor, as
he softly drew it from its sheath.

"Ha!" laughed Perseus; "before those two have done with each other, I
shall be in Rome with my secret."

And he ran towards the gap in the wall of the court by which he had
entered.

For a moment Syphax looked doubtfully to right and left. To the right
he saw a man escaping, whom he had only now discovered; to the left a
Gothic warrior, who was just entering the court of the temple. It was
impossible to reach and kill both.

He suddenly called aloud:

"Teja, Earl Teja! Help, help! A Roman! Save the Queen! There, near the
wall on the right--a Roman!"

In a moment Teja stood at Syphax's side.

"There!" cried Syphax. "I will protect the women in the church!" and he
rushed into the temple.

"Stand, Roman!" cried Teja, and rushed after Perseus.

But Perseus would not stand. He ran along the wall; he reached the
gap, but in his hurry he could not force himself through. With the
strength of despair he swung himself up upon the wall, and was already
drawing up his feet to jump down on the other side, when Teja cast his
battle-axe, and struck him on the head.

Perseus, together with his secret, fell back dead.

Teja bent over him; he could distinctly see the features of the dead
man.

"The Archon Perseus," he said, "the brother of Johannes."

He left the corpse, and at once ascended the steps which led into the
church.

On the threshold he was met by Mataswintha. Behind her came Syphax, and
Aspa with the lantern.

For a moment Teja and Mataswintha measured each other with distrustful
looks.

"I must thank thee, Earl Teja of Tarentum," at last the Princess said.
"I was in danger while pursuing my lonely devotions."

"A strange place and time for thee to choose for thy prayers. Let us
see if this Roman was the only enemy."

He took the light from Aspa's hand, and went into the chapel.

Presently he returned, a leathern shoe, inlaid with gold, in his hand.

"I found nothing--but this sandal by the altar, close to the statue of
the Apostle. It is a man's shoe."

"A votive offering of mine," said Syphax quickly. "The Apostle healed
my foot, which a thorn had wounded."

"I thought the Snake-god was thine only god?"

"I worship whatever can help me."

"In which foot did the thorn wound thee?"

For a moment Syphax hesitated.

"In the right foot," he then answered.

"It is a pity," said Teja, "the sandal is for the left foot." And he
put it into his belt. "I warn thee, Queen, against such midnight
devotions."

"I shall do my duty," answered Mataswintha harshly.

"And I mine!"

With these words Teja turned, and led the way to the camp. Silently the
Queen and her slaves followed.


At sunrise Teja stood before the King and told him everything.

"What thou sayest is no proof," said Witichis.

"But a strong cause of suspicion. And thou thyself hast told me that
the conduct of the Queen was mysterious."

"Just for that reason I must guard myself against acting on mere
suspicion. I often fear that we have acted wrongly by her, almost as
much so as by Rauthgundis."

"Possibly. But these midnight walks?"

"I shall put an end to them, were it only for her own sake."

"And the Moor? I mistrust him. I know that he is often absent for days
together; afterwards appearing again in the camp. He is a spy."

"Yes, friend," said Witichis, with a smile; "but he is my spy. He goes
in and out of Rome with my knowledge. It is he who betrays all their
plans to me."

"And yet it has done no good? And the false sandal?"

"It is really a votive offering. Before thou camest, Syphax confessed
all to me. Once, as he was waiting for the Queen, he got weary, and
began to rummage in a vault of the church; and there he found, amongst
all sorts of things, some priestly garments and hidden treasures, which
he stole. Later, fearing the wrath of the saint, he wished to atone,
and offered up in his heathen manner this golden sandal from his booty.
He described it to me exactly. With golden side-stripes, and an agate
button engraved with the letter C. Thou seest that it is so. Therefore
he knew it well, and it cannot have been dropped by a fugitive. He has
promised to bring the fellow-shoe as a proof. But, more than all, he
has discovered to me a new plan, which will put an end to all our
trouble, and deliver Belisarius himself into our hands."



                              CHAPTER IX.

While the King of the Goths communicated this plan to his friends,
Cethegus, in the early morning, was summoned to speak with Belisarius
and Johannes.

"Prefect of Rome," cried the general in a severe tone, as Cethegus
entered his quarters, "where were you last night?"

"At my post, as was my duty. At the Gate of St. Paul."

"Do you know that, last night, one of my best leaders, Perseus the
archon and the brother of Johannes here, left the city and has not been
seen since?"

"I am sorry for it. But you know that it is forbidden to leave the
walls without permission."

"But I have reason to believe," interposed Johannes, "that you very
well know what has become of my brother; that his blood is on your
hands."

"And by the slumber of Justinian," cried Belisarius angrily, "you shall
answer for it! You shall no longer tyrannise over the Emperor's army
and the Emperor's generals. The hour of reckoning has come. The
barbarians are almost defeated, and we shall see if, when _your_ head
falls, the Capitol will still stand!"

"Do matters stand thus?" thought Cethegus. "Then take care,
Belisarius!" But he remained silent.

"Speak!" cried Johannes; "where did you kill my brother?"

But before Cethegus could reply, Artasines, one of Belisarius's
body-guards, entered the room.

"Sir," he said, "outside are six Gothic warriors. They have brought the
corpse of Perseus the archon. King Witichis sends you word that Perseus
fell last night without the walls, struck by Earl Teja's axe. He sends
the body, that you may inter it with all honour."

"Heaven itself," said Cethegus, as he left the room with haughty steps,
"gives the lie to your malice!"

But slowly and reflectively he passed the Quirinal and went across the
Forum of Trajan to his dwelling.

"You threaten, Belisarius? Thanks for the hint! Let us see if we cannot
do without you!"


Arrived at his house, he found Syphax, who had been waiting for him
impatiently.

Syphax quickly made his report, and concluded:

"But first of all, sir, let the slaves who tie your sandals be whipped!
You see how badly you are served when Syphax is absent. And be so kind
as to give me your right shoe."

"Properly I should refuse to do so, and let you remain in suspense, to
punish you for your impudent lies," laughed the Prefect. "This piece of
leather is worth your life, my panther! How will you ransom it?"

"With important news. I now know all the particulars of the plan
against the life of Belisarius; the place and time, and the names of
the confederates. They are--Teja, Totila, and Hildebad."

"Each one of whom is a match for the magister militum," remarked
Cethegus, with evident pleasure.

"I think, sir, that you have prepared another nice trap for the
barbarians! According to your order, I have told them that Belisarius
himself will sally out from the Tiburtinian Gate to-morrow, in order to
forage for supplies."

"Yes; he goes himself because the Huns, who have so often been beaten,
will not again venture out alone. He will take only four hundred men."

"And the three confederates will place an ambush of a thousand men in
order to surprise Belisarius."

"This news is really worth the shoe!" said Cethegus, and threw it to
Syphax.

"Meanwhile King Witichis will make a feigned assault upon the Gate of
St. Paul, in order to divert attention from Belisarius. So I will now
hasten to the latter, as you ordered, and tell him to take three
thousand men with him, and destroy the confederates and their band."

"Stop," said Cethegus quietly; "do not be in such a hurry. You will
tell him nothing."

"What?" asked Syphax in surprise. "If he be not warned, he will be
lost!"

"One must not always interfere with the commander's guardian angel.
To-morrow Belisarius may prove his good fortune."

"Aye, aye," said Syphax, with a cunning smile, "is such your pleasure?
Then I would rather be Syphax the slave than Belisarius the magister
militum. Poor widowed Antonina!"

Cethegus was just about to stretch himself upon his couch for a short
rest, when Fidus, the ostiarius, announced:

"Kallistratos, of Corinth!"

"Always welcome!"

The young Greek with the gentle countenance entered. A flush of shame
or pleasure coloured his cheeks; it was evident that some special cause
had led him to the Prefect.

"What of beauty do you bring besides yourself?" asked Cethegus in the
Grecian tongue.

The Greek looked up with sparkling eyes.

"A heart full of admiration for you, and the wish to prove it to you. I
beg for permission to fight for you and Rome, like the two Licinii and
Piso."

"My Kallistratos! What have you, our peaceful guest, the most amiable
of Greeks, to do with our bloody business with the Goths? Leave such
hard work alone, and cherish your bright inheritance--beauty!"

"I know well that the days of Salamis have become a myth, and that you
iron Romans have never believed in our strength. That is hard; but yet
it is easier to bear, because it is you who defend our world of art and
noble customs against the dull barbarians; you--that is, Rome, and to
me Cethegus is Rome. As such, I understand this struggle, and,
understanding it thus, you see that it also concerns the Hellenes."

The Prefect smiled with pleasure.

"Well, if to you Cethegus is Rome, then Rome gladly accepts the help of
the Hellenes. Henceforward you are a tribune of the Milites Romani,
like Licinius."

"My deeds shall thank you. But I must confess one thing more; for I
know that you do not love to be surprised. I have often seen how dear
to you is the Mausoleum of Hadrian, with its treasure of statues.
Lately I counted these marble gods, and found that there were two
hundred and ninety-eight. I have made the third hundred complete by
placing amongst them my two Letoides, Apollo and Artemis, which you
praised so highly. They are a votive offering to you and Rome."

"Dear, extravagant youth!" said Cethegus. "What have you done?"

"That which is right and beautiful," answered Kallistratos simply.

"But reflect; the Mausoleum is now a fortress. If the Goths storm----"

"The Letoides stand upon the second and inner wall; and how can I fear
that the barbarians will ever again conquer the favourite place of
Cethegus? Where can the beauteous gods be more secure than in your
citadel? Your fortress is their best, because safest, temple. My
offering shall be at the same time a happy omen."

"It shall!" cried Cethegus with animation. "And I myself believe that
your gift is well protected. But allow me, in return----"

"In return you have allowed me to fight for you. Chaire!" laughed the
Greek, and was gone.

"The boy loves me dearly," said Cethegus. "And I am like other human
fools--it does me good; and that not merely because I can thereby rule
him."

Heavy footsteps were now heard upon the marble of the vestibule, and a
tribune of the army entered.

It was a young Roman with noble features, but of a graver expression
than his years warranted. His cheek-bones made a right angle with his
straight and severe brow, in true Roman outline; in the deep-sunk eyes
lay Roman strength and--at this moment--resolute earnestness, and a
self-will regardless of all but itself.

"Aha! Severinus, son of Boëthius! Welcome, my young hero and
philosopher! I have not seen you for many months. Whence come you?"

"From the grave of my mother!" answered Severinus, with a fixed look at
the questioner.

Cethegus sprang from his seat.

"What! Rusticiana? The friend of my youth? The wife of my Boëthius?"

"She is dead," said the son shortly.

The Prefect would have taken his hand, but Severinus withdrew it.

"My son! my poor Severinus! And did she die--without a word for me?"

"I bring you her last words--they concern you!"

"How did she die? Of what illness?"

"Of grief and remorse."

"Grief!" sighed Cethegus; "that I understand. But why should she feel
remorse? And her last word was for me? Tell me, what did she say?"

Severinus approached the Prefect so closely that he touched his knee,
and looking piercingly into his eyes, he answered:

"She said, 'A curse, a curse upon Cethegus, who poisoned my child!"

Cethegus looked at him quietly.

"Did she die delirious?" he coldly asked.

"No, murderer! Her delirium was to trust in you! In the hour of her
death she confessed to Cassiodorus and to me that it was her hand which
administered the poison--with which you had furnished her--to the young
tyrant. She told us all the circumstances. She was supported as she
spoke by old Corbulo and his daughter, Daphnidion. 'Too late I
learned,' she concluded, 'that my child had drunk of the deadly cup.
And there was no one to hold Camilla's hand as she took it; for I was
still in the boat upon the sea, and Cethegus was in the plantain-alley.'
Then old Corbulo called out, turning pale, 'What! did the Prefect know
that the cup contained poison?' 'Certainly,' answered my mother; 'for,
as I left the garden, I had told him that the deed was done.' Corbulo
was dumb with horror; but Daphnidion cried out in violent grief, 'Alas!
my poor mistress! Then Cethegus murdered your child; for he stood near,
close to me, and watched her drink.' 'He watched her drink?' asked my
mother, in a voice which will ring in my ears for ever. 'He watched her
as she drank,' repeated the freedman and his daughter. 'Oh! then may
his cursed soul be delivered to the devils in hell!' cried my mother.
'Revenge, O God! revenge hereafter! Revenge upon earth, my sons, for
Camilla! A curse upon Cethegus!' And she fell back and expired."

The Prefect preserved his composure. But he secretly grasped the dagger
which was hidden in the breast-folds of his tunic.

"But you," he asked after a pause, "what did you do?"

"I knelt down by the corpse of my mother and kissed her cold hand. And
I swore to fulfil her dying behest. Woe to you, Prefect of Rome,
poisoner and murderer of my sister! You shall not live!"

"Son of Boëthius, will you become a murderer for the mad words of a
stupid slave and his daughter? It would be worthy of a hero and a
philosopher."

"I do not think of murder. If I were a German, I should, according to
their barbaric custom--and just now I think it excellent--challenge you
to mortal combat. But I am a Roman, and will lawfully seek my revenge.
Take care. Prefect, there are still just judges in Italy. For many
months the enemy has prevented me from reaching the city. I only
arrived here to-day by sea, and to-morrow I shall accuse you before the
Senate, who will be your judges. Then we shall meet again."

Cethegus suddenly placed himself between the youth and the door.

But Severinus cried:

"Softly! I am prudent where a murderer is concerned. Three of my
friends accompanied me to your house. If I do not return immediately,
they will come with the lictors to search for me."

"I only wish," said Cethegus, again fully composed, "to warn you against
a shameful course. If you like to prosecute the oldest friend of your
family, in consequence of the feverish words of a dying woman, then do
so; I cannot prevent you. But first a commission. You will become my
accuser, but you still remain a soldier and my tribune. You will obey
when your general commands."

"I shall obey."

"To-morrow Belisarius will make a sally, and the barbarians intend to
attack one of the gates. I must protect the city. But I fear danger for
the lion-hearted Belisarius. I must be sure that he is faithfully
guarded. Therefore I order you to accompany the general to-morrow, and
to defend his life with your own."

"With mine own."

"'Tis good, tribune, I depend upon your word."

"Depend upon my first word too! Farewell, till we meet again, after the
fight, before the Senate. With what ardour do I long for both contests!
Farewell--until we meet in the Senate!"

"We shall never meet again!" said Cethegus, as the steps of his visitor
died away. "Syphax!" he called aloud, "bring wine and dinner. We must
strengthen ourselves for to-morrow's work!"



                               CHAPTER X.

Early next morning Rome and the Gothic encampment were equally full of
life and movement.

Mataswintha and Syphax had learned somewhat, and had imparted it to
Cethegus; but they had not known all.

They had heard of the plot of the three Goths against the life of
Belisarius, and of the earlier plan of a sham assault upon the Gate of
St. Paul.

But they had not heard that the King, changing his plan, had determined
to take advantage of the absence of the great general, in order to try
if Gothic heroism were not yet able to conquer the fortifications and
the genius of Belisarius.

In the council of war, no one had deceived himself as to the importance
and risk of the undertaking upon which they had determined; for if,
like all former ones--and Procopius had already counted sixty battles,
sallies, assaults and skirmishes--this last attempt failed, no further
exertion could be demanded from the harassed and greatly diminished
army.

For this reason they had, at Teja's advice, taken an oath to keep their
plan a profound secret, and thus Mataswintha had learned nothing from
the King.

Even the keen senses of the Moor had been unable to scent out that
anything of importance was in preparation for that day--the Gothic
troops themselves knew not what.

Totila, Hildebad, and Teja had started with their horsemen during the
night, and had placed themselves in ambush on the south of the Valerian
Way, in a hollow near the tomb of the Fulvias, through which Belisarius
would necessarily pass. They hoped to have finished their task soon
enough to be able to take an important part in the events which were
impending against the city.

While the King, with Hildebrand, Guntharis, and Markja, was mustering
the troops within the camp, Belisarius marched at daybreak out of the
Tiburtinian Gate, surrounded by part of his body-guard.

Procopius and Severinus rode on his right and left; Aigan, the
Massagetian, bore his banner, which accompanied the magister militum on
all occasions.

Constantinus, to whom he had entrusted the care of the "Belisarian"
part of Rome during his absence, doubled all the posts along the walls,
and placed his troops under arms close to the ramparts. He sent word to
the Prefect to do the same with the Byzantines under his command.

His messenger met Cethegus upon the walls between the Appian Gate and
the Gate of St. Paul.

"So Belisarius thinks," said Cethegus sarcastically, as he obeyed the
order, "that Rome cannot be safe unless he guard it! But I think that
Belisarius would be in evil plight, had I not protected my Rome. Come,
Lucius Licinius," he whispered to the latter, "we must decide upon what
we must do should Belisarius fail to return from his ride. In that
case, a firm hand must be laid upon the Byzantine army."

"I know whose hand will do it."

"It may perhaps lead to a short struggle with those of the body-guard
still in Rome; either in the Baths of Diocletian or at the Tiburtinian
Gate. They must be crushed before they have time to reflect. Take three
thousand of my Isaurians, and divide them, without attracting
attention, round about the Baths, and, above all things, occupy the
Tiburtinian Gate."

"But whence shall I withdraw the men?"

"From the Mausoleum of Hadrian," said Cethegus after a moment's
reflection.

"And the Goths?"

"Bah! the Mausoleum is strong; it will protect itself, for the
assaulters must first get over the river to the south, and then climb
those smooth walls of Parian marble, in which the Greek and I take such
pride. And besides," he added with a smile, "look up! There stands a
host of marble gods and heroes; they may themselves protect their
temple against the barbarians. Do you see? I told you it would be so.
The Goths only think of attacking the Gate of St. Paul," he concluded,
pointing towards the Gothic camp, whence, just at that moment, a strong
division marched out in the direction he mentioned.

Licinius obeyed his orders, and soon led three thousand
Isaurians--perhaps the half of the garrison of the Mausoleum--over the
river and the Viminalian Hill in the direction of the Baths of
Diocletian. He then replaced Belisarius's Armenians at the Tiburtinian
Gate by three hundred Isaurians and legionaries.

But Cethegus turned to the Salarian Gate, where Constantinus now
remained as the representative of Belisarius.

"I must have him out of the way," said Cethegus to himself, "when the
news arrives.--When you have repulsed the barbarians," he said aloud to
Constantinus, "no doubt you will make a sally. What an opportunity to
gather laurels while your commander is yet at a distance!"

"Yes," said Constantinus, "they shall see that we can fight, even
without Belisarius."

"But you must aim with more composure," said Cethegus, turning to a
Persian archer and taking his bow. "Do you see that Goth, the leader on
horseback? He shall fall."

Cethegus drew the bow. The Goth fell from his horse, pierced through
the neck by the arrow.

"And you use my shooting-machines clumsily too! Do you see that oak-tree?
A leader of one of the Gothic thousands is standing beneath it, clad in
a coat of mail. Pay attention!"

He directed the machine; aimed and shot. The mailed Goth was pierced
through and through, and nailed to the tree.

Just then a Saracen horseman rode quickly up below the wall.

"Archon," he cried to Constantinus, "Bessas begs for reinforcements for
the Prænestinian Gate! The Goths are advancing."

Constantinus looked doubtfully at Cethegus.

"Pshaw!" said the latter; "the only attack to be feared will be made
upon the Gate of St. Paul, and that is well defended, I am certain.
Tell Bessas that he is scared too soon. Besides, I have six lions, ten
tigers and twelve bears in the Vivarium waiting for the next feast at
the Circus. Let them loose upon the barbarians for the present. It will
afford a spectacle for the Romans."

But now one of the body-guard hurried up from Mons Pincius.

"Help, sir. Help, Constantinus! your own gate, the Flaminian, is in
danger! Countless barbarians! Ursicinus begs for assistance!"

"There too?" asked Cethegus incredulously.

"Reinforcements for the broken walls between the Flaminian and the
Pincian Gates!" cried a second messenger, also sent by Ursicinus.

"You need not defend that part. You know that it stands under the
special protection of St. Peter; that will suffice," said Constantinus
encouragingly.

Cethegus smiled.

"Yes, to-day most surely; for it will not be attacked at all."

"Prefect!" cried Marcus Licinius, who just then hurried up, out of
breath; "quick to the Capitol! I have just come thence. All the seven
camps of the enemy are vomiting Goths from every exit. A general storm
is intended upon all the gates of Rome."

"That can hardly be," said Cethegus with a smile. "But I will go up.
You, Marcus Licinius, will answer to me for the Tiburtinian Gate. It
_must_ be mine. Away with you! Take your two hundred legionaries."

With these words he mounted his horse and rode towards the Capitol
round the foot of the Viminalian Hill. There he met with Lucius
Licinius and his Isaurians.

"General," said Lucius, "things look grave, very grave! What about the
Isaurians? Do you persist in your order?"

"Have I retracted it?" said Cethegus severely. "Lucius, you and the
other tribunes must follow me. Isaurians, you, under your chief,
Asgares, will march between the Baths and the Tiburtinian Gate."

He did not believe there was danger for Rome. He thought he knew what
the barbarians really intended at this moment.

"The feint of a general attack," he argued, "is only meant to prevent
the Byzantines from thinking of the danger of their commander outside
the walls."

He soon reached and ascended a tower of the Capitol, whence he could
overlook the whole plain.

It was filled with Gothic weapons.

It was a splendid spectacle.

From all the gates of the encampment poured the Gothic troops,
encircling the whole circumference of the city.

It was evident that the assault was intended to be carried on
simultaneously against all the gates of Rome.

Foremost came the archers and slingers, in light groups of skirmishers,
whose business it was to rid the ramparts of their defenders.

Then followed battering-rams and wall-breakers, taken from Roman
arsenals or constructed on Roman models, though often clumsily enough;
harnessed with horses and oxen and served by soldiers without weapons
of attack, whose sole business it was to protect themselves and their
teams against the projectiles of the enemy by means of their shields.

Close behind, in thick ranks and fully armed, furnished with
battle-axes and strong knives for the hand-to-hand struggle, and
dragging heavy ladders, came the warriors who were to undertake the
assault.

These three separate lines of attack advanced steadily, in good order,
and with an even step. The sun glittered upon their helmets; at
intervals of equal lengths sounded the long-drawn summons of the Gothic
horns.

"They have learned something of us," cried Cethegus, with a soldier's
pride in the fine array. "The man who has ordered these ranks
understands war."

"Who is it?" asked Kallistratos, who, in splendid armour, stood near
Lucius Licinius.

"King Witichis, without doubt," answered Cethegus.

"I should not have thought that simple man, with his modest expression,
capable of such generalship."

"These barbarians are often unfathomable," remarked Cethegus.

And now he rode away from the Capitol, over the river to the ramparts
at the Pancratian Gate, where the first attack seemed to threaten.

There he ascended the corner tower with his followers.

"Who is the old man with the flowing beard, marching before his troop
and carrying a stone axe? He looks as if the lightning of Zeus had
missed him in the battle with the Titans."

"It is Theodoric's old master-at-arms; he marches against this gate,"
answered the Prefect.

"And who is the richly-accoutred man upon the brown charger, with the
wolfs head upon his helmet? He is marching towards the Porta
Portuensis."

"That is Duke Guntharis, the Wölfung," said Lucius Licinius.

"And see there, too, on the eastern side of the city, away over the
river, as far as the eye can reach, the ranks of the enemy advance
against all the gates," cried Piso.

"But where is the King himself!" asked Kallistratos.

"Look! there in the middle you see the Gothic standard. There he is,
opposite the Pancratian Gate," answered the Prefect.

"He alone, with his strong division, stands motionless far behind the
lines," said Salvius Julianus, the young jurist.

"Will he not join in the fight!" asked Massurius.

"It would be against his habit not to do so. But let us go down upon
the ramparts; the fight begins," said Cethegus.

"Hildebrand has reached the trench."

"There stand my Byzantines, under Gregorius. The Gothic archers aim
well. The ramparts become thinned. Massurius, bring up my Abasgian
archers, and the best archers of the legions. They must aim at the oxen
and horses of the battering-rams."

Very soon the battle was kindled upon all sides, and Cethegus remarked
with rage that the Goths progressed everywhere.

The Byzantines seemed to miss their leader; they shot at random and
fell back from the walls, against which the Goths pressed with unusual
daring.

They had already crossed the trenches at many points, and Duke
Guntharis had even erected ladders against the walls near the
Portuensian Gate; while the old master-at-arms had dragged a strong
battering-ram to the Pancratian Gate, and had caused it to be protected
by a penthouse against the fiery darts from above.

Already the first strokes of the ram thundered through the uproar of
the battle against the beams of the gate.

This well-known sound gave the Prefect a shock.

"It is evident," he said to himself, "that they are in good earnest."

Again a thundering stroke,

Gregorius, the Byzantine, looked at him inquiringly.

"This must not continue any longer," cried Cethegus angrily; and he
tore a bow and quiver from an archer who stood near him, and hurried to
the battlements over the gate.

"Here, archers and slingers! Follow me!" he cried. "Bring heavy stones.
Where is the next balista? Where the scorpions? That penthouse must
come down!"

But under it stood Gothic archers, who eagerly looked through the
apertures at the pinnacles of the battlements.

"It is useless, Haduswinth," grumbled young Gunthamund; "for the third
time I have aimed in vain. Not one of them will venture even his nose
above the battlements."

"Patience!" answered the old man; "only keep thy bow ready bent. Some
curious body will be sure to show himself. Lay a bow ready for me too,
and have patience."

"Patience! That is easier for thee with thy seventy years, than for me
with my twenty," grumbled Gunthamund.

Meanwhile Cethegus reached the wall over the gate, and cast a look
across the plain.

There he saw the King standing motionless in the distance with his
centre, upon the right bank of the Tiber.

This sight disturbed him.

"What does he intend? Has he learned that the commander-in-chief ought
not to fight? Come, Gajus," he cried to a young archer, who had boldly
followed him, "your young eyes are sharp. Look over the battlements.
What is the King doing there?"

And he bent over the bulwarks. Gajus followed his example, and both
looked out eagerly.

"Now, Gunthamund!" cried Haduswinth below.

Two strings twanged, and the two Romans started back.

Gajus fell, shot in the forehead; and an arrow fell rattling from the
Prefect's helmet.

Cethegus passed his hand across his brow.

"You live, my general!" cried Piso, springing towards him.

"Yes, friend. It was well aimed, but the gods need me yet. Only the
skin is scratched," said Cethegus, and set his helmet straight.



                              CHAPTER XI.

Just then Syphax appeared upon the wall.

His master had strictly forbidden him to take part in the fight. He
could not spare him.

"Woe--woe!" cried Syphax, so loudly, that it struck Cethegus--who knew
the Moor's usual self-control--strangely.

"What has happened?"

"A great misfortune! Constantinus is severely wounded. He led a sortie
from the Salarian Gate, and at once stumbled upon the Gothic ranks. A
stone from a sling hit him on the brow. With difficulty his people
saved him, and bore him back within the walls. There I received the
fainting man--he named you, the Prefect, as his successor. Here is his
general's staff."

"That is not possible!" shouted Bessas, who had followed at Syphax's
heels. He had come in person to demand reinforcements from the Prefect,
and arrived just in time to hear this news. "That is not possible," he
repeated, "or Constantinus was raving when he said it."

"If he had appointed you he might have been so," said Cethegus quietly,
taking the staff, and thanking the cunning slave with a rapid motion of
his hand.

With a furious look Bessas left the ramparts and hurried away.

"Follow him, and watch him carefully, Syphax," whispered the Prefect.

An Isaurian mercenary hastily approached.

"Reinforcements, Prefect, for the Porta Portuensis! Duke Guntharis has
stormed the wall!"

He was followed by Cabao, the leader of the Moorish mounted archers,
who cried:

"Constantinus is dead! You must represent him."

"I represent Belisarius," said Cethegus proudly. "Take five hundred
Armenians from the Appian Gate, and send them to the Porta Portuensis."

"Help--help for the Appian Gate! All the men on the ramparts are shot
dead!" cried a Persian horseman, galloping up. "The farthest outwork is
nearly lost; it may yet be saved, but with difficulty. It would be
impossible to retake it!"

Cethegus called his young jurisconsult, Salvius Julianus, now his
war-tribune.

"Up, my jurist! '_Beati possidentes!_' Take a hundred legionaries and
keep the outwork at all costs until further assistance arrive." And
again he looked over the breastwork.

Under his feet the fight raged; the battering-rams thundered. But he
was more troubled by the mysterious inaction which the King preserved
in the background than by the turmoil close at hand.

"Of what can he be thinking?"

Just then a fearful crash and a loud shout of joy from the barbarians
sounded from below. Cethegus had no need to ask what it was; in a
moment he had reached the gate.

"The gate is broken!" cried his people.

"I know it. _We_ now must be the bolts of Rome!"

And pressing his shield more firmly to his side, he went up to the
right wing of the gate, in which yawned a broad fissure. And again the
battering-ram struck the shattered planks near the crevice.

"Another such stroke and the gate will fall!" said Gregorius, the
Byzantine.

"Quite right; therefore we must not let it be repeated. Here--to
me--Gregorius and Lucius! Form, milites! Spears lowered! Torches and
firebrands! Make ready to sally. When I raise my sword, open the gate,
and cast ram and penthouse and all into the trench."

"You are very daring, my general!" cried Lucius Licinius, taking his
stand close to Cethegus with delight.

"Yes, now there is cause to be daring, my friend."

The column was formed; the Prefect was just about to give the sign,
when, from behind, there arose a noise still greater than that made by
the storming Goths; screams of pain and the tramp of horses. Bessas
came up in great agitation; he caught the Prefect's arm--his voice
failed him.

"Why do you hinder me at this moment?" asked. Cethegus, pushing him
aside.

"Belisarius's troops," at last panted the Thracian, "stand sorely
wounded outside the Tiburtinian Gate they beg for admittance--furious
Goths are at their heels--Belisarius has fallen into an ambush--he is
dead."

"Belisarius is taken!" cried a gate-keeper, who hurried up breathless.

"The Goths--the Goths are upon us! at the Nomentanian and Tiburtinian
Gates!" was shouted from the streets.

"Belisarius's flag is taken! Procopius is defending the corpse of
Belisarius!"

"Give orders for the Tiburtinian Gate to be opened," persisted Bessas.
"Your Isaurians are there. Who sent them?"

"I," answered Cethegus reflectively.

"They will not open without your orders. Save at least the corpse of
our noble commander!"

Cethegus lingered--he held his hand half raised--he hesitated.

"I would gladly save his _corpse_!" he thought.

Just then Syphax rushed up to him, and whispered:

"No, he still lives! I saw him from the ramparts. He moves; but he will
be taken prisoner directly. The Gothic horsemen are close upon him.
Totila and Teja will be up with him immediately!"

"Give the order; let the Tiburtinian Gate be opened," insisted Bessas.

But the Prefect's eyes flashed; over his countenance spread an
expression of proud and bold decision, and illumined it with demoniac
beauty. He struck his sword against the shattered wing of the gate
before him and cried:

"Sally! First Rome; then Belisarius! Rome and triumph!"

The gate flew open. The storming Goths, already sure of victory, had
expected anything rather than such a bold attack from the Byzantines,
whom they believed to be completely cowed. They were crowded about the
gate without order. They were completely taken by surprise, and were
soon pushed into the yawning ditch behind them by the sudden and
irresistible attack.

Old Hildebrand would not leave his battering-ram. Raising himself to
his full height, he shattered Gregorius's tall helmet with his
stone-axe. But almost at the same moment Lucius Licinius pushed him
into the trench with the spike of his shield. Cethegus cut the ropes
which held the battering-ram, and it fell crashing down over the old
man.

"Now fire all the wooden machines!" cried Cethegus.

Quickly the flames caught the beams.

The victorious Romans immediately retired within the walls.

But then Syphax, meeting the Prefect, cried:

"Mutiny, master! Mutiny and rebellion! The Byzantines will no longer
obey you! Bessas calls upon them to open the Tiburtinian Gate by force.
His body-guard threaten to attack Marcus Licinius, and the Huns to
slaughter your legionaries and Isaurians!"

"They shall repent it!"  cried Cethegus furiously. "Woe to Bessas! I
will remember this! Up, Lucius Licinius! take half the remaining
Isaurians. No take them all--_all_! You know where they stand. Attack
the body-guard of the Thracian from behind, and if they will not yield,
strike them down without mercy. Help your brother! I will follow
immediately."

Lucius Licinius lingered.

"And the Tiburtinian Gate?"

"Must remain closed."

"And Belisarius?"

"Must remain outside."

"Teja and Totila have almost reached him!"

"So much the less dare we open! First Rome; then the rest! Obey,
tribune!"

Cethegus remained behind to order the reparation of the damaged gate.
It took a considerable time.

"How was it, Syphax!" he asked his slave. "Was he really alive?"

"He still lives."

"How stupid these Goths are!"

A messenger arrived from Lucius.

"Your tribune sends word that Bessas will not yield. The blood of your
legionaries has already been shed at the Tiburtinian Gate. And Asgares
and the Isaurians hesitate to strike; they doubt that you are in
earnest."

"I will show them that I am in earnest!" cried Cethegus, as he mounted
his horse and galloped away like the wind.

He had to go a long way. Over the bridge of the Janiculum, past the
Capitol, across the Forum Romanum, through the Via Sacra and the Arch
of Titus, leaving the Baths of Titus to the right; out over the
Esquiline Hill, and, lastly, through the Esquiline Gate to the outer
Tiburtinian Gate--a distance which extended from the extreme western to
the extreme eastern limit of the immense city.

When he reached the gate, he found the bodyguard of Bessas and
Belisarius showing a double front.

One line prepared to overpower the legionaries and Isaurians under
Marcus Licinius at the gate, and to open the latter by force; while the
second line stood opposed to the rest of the Isaurians, to whom Lucius
gave the order to advance in vain.

"Mercenaries!" cried Cethegus, checking his foaming horse close before
them; "to whom have you sworn obedience--to me or to Belisarius?"

"To you, general," said Asgares, the leader, stepping forward; "but I
thought----"

The sword of the Prefect flashed; and, struck to the heart, the man
fell.

"Your duty is to obey, stupid rascal, and not to think!"

The Isaurians were horrified.

But Cethegus quickly gave the word of command.

"Lower your spears! Follow me! Charge!"

And the Isaurians now obeyed him. Another moment, and a fight would
have commenced in the city itself.

But just then, from the west, in the direction of the Aurelian Gate,
was heard a terrible, all-overpowering cry.

"Woe! woe! all is lost! The Goths are upon us! The city is taken!"

Cethegus turned pale, and looked behind him.

Kallistratos galloped up, blood flowing from his face and neck.

"Cethegus," he cried, "all is over! The barbarians are in Rome! The
wall is forced!"

"Where?" asked the Prefect, in a hollow voice.

"At the Mausoleum!"

"Oh, my general!" cried Lucius, "I warned you!"

"That is Witichis!" said Cethegus, closing his eyes as if in pain.

"How do you know it?" asked Kallistratos, astonished.

"Enough! I do know it."

It was a fearful moment for the Prefect. He was obliged to confess to
himself that, recklessly following his plan for the ruin of Belisarius,
he had for a short period neglected Rome.

He ground his teeth.

"Cethegus has exposed the Mausoleum! Cethegus has ruined Rome!" cried
Bessas, at the head of the body-guard.

"And Cethegus will save Rome!" cried the Prefect, raising himself in
his saddle. "Follow me, Isaurians and legionaries!"

"And Belisarius?" whispered Syphax.

"He may enter. First Rome; then the rest! Follow me!"

And Cethegus galloped off the same way that he had come.

Only a few mounted men could keep up with him; his foot-soldiers and
Isaurians followed at a run.



                              CHAPTER XII.

At the same time a pause ensued before the Tiburtinian Gate.

A messenger had recalled the Gothic horsemen from the useless fight.

They were to send all the men they could dispose of as fast as possible
round the city to the Aurelian Gate, through which their comrades had
just entered the city; there the greatest available force was
necessary.

The horsemen, turning to the left, galloped towards the gate which had
now become the centre of the struggle; but their own foot-soldiers,
storming the five gates which lay between--the Porta Clausa, the
Nomentanian, Salarian, Pincian, and Flaminian Gates--blocked their
progress so long, that they arrived too late for the result of the
attack upon the Mausoleum.

We recollect the position of this favourite resort of the Prefect.
Opposite the Vatican Hill, at about a stone's throw from the Aurelian
Gate, with which it was connected by side walls, and protected
everywhere, except on the south, where ran the river, by new
fortifications, towered the "Moles Hadriani," an immense round tower of
the firmest masonry.

A sort of court surrounded the principal building. On the south, before
the first and outer wall of defence, flowed the Tiber. The ramparts of
this outer wall, and the court and battlements of the inner wall, were
usually occupied by the Isaurians, whom, in an evil hour, the Prefect
had withdrawn in order to carry out his plot against Belisarius.

On the parapet of the inner wall stood the numerous statues of marble
and bronze, which had been raised to the number of three hundred by the
gift of Kallistratos.

The King of the Goths had chosen for himself a position far back in the
middle of the wide semicircle which his army had drawn around the city
to the west. He had stationed himself upon the "field of Nero," on the
right bank of the Tiber, between the Pancratian (old Aurelian) and the
(new) Aurelian Gates, a post usually occupied by Earl Markja, of
Mediolanum.

Witichis founded his plan upon the fact that the general storming of
all the gates would necessarily disperse the forces of the besieged;
and as soon as some part of the ramparts should be more than usually
exposed by the withdrawal of its defenders, he intended to make use of
the circumstance, and attack at that point.

With this view, he had quietly remained immovable far behind the
storming columns.

He had given orders to his leaders to call him at once should a gap in
the line of defence be observed.

He had waited long--very long.

He had had to bear many a word of impatience from his troops, who were
forced to remain idle while their comrades were advancing on all sides.
Long, long they waited for a messenger to call them into action.

At last the King himself was the first to notice that the well-known
flags and the thickly-crowded spears of the Isaurians had disappeared
from the outer wall of the Mausoleum.

He observed the place attentively. The Isaurians could not have been
relieved, for the gaps were not filled up.

Then he sprang from his saddle, gave his horse a stroke with the flat
of his hand, and cried, "Home, Boreas!"

The clever animal galloped straight back to the camp.

"Now forward, my Goths! forward, Earl Markja!" cried the King. "Over
the river there! Leave the wall-breakers behind: take only shields and
storming-ladders, and the axes. Forward!"

And at a run he reached the steep bank at the southern bend of the
river, and descended the hill.

"No bridge. King, and no ford!" asked a Goth behind him.

"No, friend Iffamer; we must swim!"

And the King sprang into the dirty yellow water, which splashed,
hissing, high above his helmet.

In a few moments he had reached the opposite bank, the foremost of his
people with him.

Soon they stood close before the lofty outer wall of the Mausoleum, and
the warriors looked up inquiringly and anxiously.

"Bring the ladders!" cried Witichis. "Do you not see? There are no
defenders! Are you afraid of mere stones?"

The ladders were quickly raised, and the outer wall scaled. The few
soldiers who had remained to defend this wall were overcome, the
ladders drawn up and let down on the inner side.

The King was the first in the court.

There, it is true, the progress of the Goths was for a time arrested.

For Quintus Piso and Kallistratos stood on the ramparts of the inner
wall, with a hundred legionaries and a few Isaurians. They had hastened
thither from the Pancratian Gate. They hurled a thick hail of spears
and arrows at the Goths as they descended singly into the court. Their
catapults were also not without effect.

"Send for assistance to Cethegus!" cried Piso, on the wall; and
Kallistratos immediately rushed away.

Below in the court the Goths fell right and left at the side of
Witichis.

"What shall we do?" asked Markja.

"Wait until they have exhausted their projectiles. It cannot last much
longer. They shoot and hurl too hastily in their fright. Do you see?
Already more stones are flying than arrows, and there are no more
spears."

"But their balistas?"

"They will presently be able to hurt us no longer. Prepare to storm!
See, the hail is much thinner; now be ready with the ladders and axes.
Follow me quickly!"

And the Goths ran at a quick step across the court. Very few fell. The
greater part reached the second and inner wall in safety, and a hundred
ladders were raised.

And now all Procopius's balistas and machines were useless; for being
directed for a wide range, they could not be placed in a perpendicular
direction without great trouble and loss of time.

Piso observed this, and turned pale.

"Spears! spears! or all is lost!"

"They are all cast away," panted fat Balbus, who stood near him, with a
look of despair.

"Then all is lost!" sighed Piso, letting fall his wearied arms.

"Come, Massurius, let us save ourselves," cried Balbus.

"No, let us stand and die," cried Piso.

Over the edge of the wall appeared the first Gothic helmet.

All at once a cry was heard upon the steps leading on to the wall
citywards.

"Cethegus! Cethegus the Prefect!"

And he it was. He sprang upon the ramparts, and attacking the Goth, who
had just laid his hand upon the breastwork before swinging himself
over, he cut off hand and arm. The man screamed and fell.

"Oh, Cethegus!" cried Piso; "you come in the very nick of time!"

"I hope so," said Cethegus, and overturned the ladder which was raised
against the wall just in front of him.

Witichis had mounted it--he sprang down with agility.

"But I must have projectiles; spears, lances! else we can do nothing!"
cried Cethegus.

"There is nothing left," answered Balbus; "we hoped that you would come
with your Isaurians."

"They are still far, far behind me!" cried Kallistratos, who was the
first to arrive after Cethegus.

And the number of ladders and the rising helmets increased. Ruin was
imminent. Cethegus looked wildly round.

"Projectiles," he cried, stamping his foot; "we must have them!"

At that moment his eye fell upon a gigantic marble statue of Jupiter,
which stood upon the ramparts to his left hand. A thought flashed
across him. He sprang up, and with his axe struck off the right arm of
the statue, together with the thunderbolt it held.

"Jupiter!" he cried, "lend me thy lightnings! Why dost thou hold them
so idly? Up, my men! shatter the statues and hurl them at the enemy!"

Before he could finish his sentence, his example was followed.

The hard-pressed defenders fell upon the gods and heroes with hammers
and axes, and in a moment the lovely forms were shattered.

It was a frightful sight. There lay a grand Hadrian, an equestrian
statue, man and horse split in two; there a laughing Aphrodite fell
upon its knees; there the beautiful head of an Antinous fell from the
trunk, and hurled by two hands, fell crashing upon a Gothic shield of
buffalo-hide. And far and wide upon the ramparts fell fragments and
pieces of marble and bronze, of iron and gold.

Down from the ramparts, thundering and crashing, fell the mighty weight
of metal and stone, and shattered the helms and shields, the armour and
limbs of the attacking Goths, and the ladders which bore them.

Cethegus looked with horror at the work of destruction which his words
had called into action.

But it had saved them.

Twelve, fifteen, twenty ladders stood empty, although a moment before
they had swarmed with men like ants; just as many lay broken at the
foot of the wall.

Surprised by this unexpected hail of bronze and marble, the Goths fell
back for a space.

But presently Markja's horn called them to the attack. And again the
tons of marble thundered through the air.

"Unhappy man, what have you done?" cried Kallistratos, full of grief,
and staring at the ruin.

"What was necessary!" cried Cethegus, and hurled the trunk of the
Jupiter-statue over the wall. "Did you see it strike? two barbarians at
one blow." And he looked down with great content.

At that moment he heard the Corinthian cry:

"No, no; not this one. Not the Apollo!"

Cethegus turned and saw a gigantic Isaurian raising his axe over the
head of the statue.

"Fool, shall the Goths come up?" asked the mercenary, and raised his
arm again.

"Not my Apollo!" repeated the Greek, and embraced the statue with both
arms, protecting it with his body.

Earl Markja saw this movement from his stand upon the nearest ladder,
and believing that Kallistratos was about to hurl the statue at him, he
cast his spear and hit the Greek in the breast.

"Ah--Cethegus!" gasped Kallistratos--and fell dead.

The Prefect saw him fall, and contracted his brows.

"Save the corpse, and spare his two gods!" he said briefly, and
overthrew the ladder upon which Markja was standing; more he could
neither say nor do, for already a new and more imminent danger
attracted his attention.

Witichis, half thrown, half springing from his ladder, had remained
standing close under the wall, amidst a hail of stone and metal,
seeking for new means of attack.

For, since the first trial with the storming-ladders had been rendered
futile by the unexpected and novel projectiles, he had scarcely any
hope left of winning the wall.

While he was thus looking and waiting, the heavy marble pedestal of a
"Mars Gradivus" fell close to his feet, rebounded and struck one of the
slabs of the wall. And this slab, which seemed to be made of the
hardest stone, broke into little pieces of lime and mortar.

In its place was revealed a small wooden door, which, loosely covered
and concealed by the mortar, was used by the masons and workpeople as a
means of exit and entrance when obliged to repair the immense edifice.

Witichis had scarcely caught sight of this wooden door, than he cried
out exultingly:

"Here, Goths, here! Bring axes!" and he himself dealt a blow at the
thin boards, which seemed anything but strong.

The new and singular sound struck the ear of the Prefect; he paused in
his bloody work and listened.

"That is iron against wood, by Cæsar!" he said to himself, and sprang
down the narrow stairway, which led on the inner side of the wall into
the faintly illuminated interior of the Mausoleum.

There he heard a louder stroke than all which had preceded it; a dull
crash; a sharp sound of splintered wood; and then an exultant cry from
the Goths.

As he reached the last step of the stair, the door fell crashing
inwards, and King Witichis was visible upon the threshold.

"Rome is mine!" cried Witichis, letting his axe fall and drawing his
sword.

"You lie, Witichis! for the first time in your life!" cried Cethegus
furiously, and, springing forward, he pressed the strong spike of his
shield so firmly against the breastplate of the Goth, that the latter,
surprised, fell back a step.

The Prefect took advantage of the movement and placed himself upon the
threshold, completely blocking up the doorway.

"Where are my Isaurians!" he shouted. But the next moment Witichis had
recognised him. "So we meet at last in single combat for Rome!" cried
the King.

And now it was his turn to attack. Cethegus, who wished to close the
passage, covered his left side with his shield; his right hand, armed
only with a short sword, was insufficient for the protection of his
right side.

The thrust of Witichis's long sword, weakly parried by Cethegus, cut
through the latter's coat of mail and entered deeply into his right
breast.

Cethegus staggered; he bent forward; but he did not fall.

"Rome! Rome!" he cried faintly; and convulsively kept himself upright.

Witichis had fallen back to gain space for a final thrust.

But at that moment he was recognised by Piso on the wall, who hurled a
splendid sleeping Faun which lay near him down upon the King. It struck
the King's shoulder, and he fell.

Earl Markja, Iffamer and Aligern bore him out of the fight.

Cethegus saw him fall, and then himself sank down upon the threshold of
the door; the protecting arms of a friend received him--but he could
recognise nothing; his senses failed him.

He was presently recalled to consciousness by a well-known sound, which
rejoiced his soul; it was the tones of the tubas of his legionaries and
the battle-cry of his Isaurians, who had at last arrived, and, led by
the Licinii, fell upon the Goths, who were disheartened by the fall of
their King.

The Isaurians, after a bloody fight, had issued through a breach in the
outer wall (which had been broken outwards by the Goths who were
inside).

The Prefect saw the last of the barbarians fly; then his eyes closed
once more.

"Cethegus!" cried the friend who held him in his arms, "Belisarius is
dying; and you, you too are lost!"

Cethegus recognised the voice of Procopius.

"I do not know," he said with a last effort, "but Rome--Rome is saved!"

And his senses completely forsook him.



                             CHAPTER XIII.

After the terrible exertion of strength in the general attack and its
repulse, which had begun with the dawn of day, and had only ended at
its close, a long pause of exhaustion ensued on the part of both Goths
and Romans. The three commanders, Belisarius, Cethegus, and Witichis,
lay for weeks recovering from their wounds.

But the actual armistice was more the effect of the deep discouragement
and oppression which had come over the Gothic army when, after striving
for victory to the uttermost, it had been wrested from them at the
moment of seeming success.

All day they had done their best; their heroes had outvied each other
in deeds of valour; and yet both their plans, that against Belisarius
and that against the city, were wrecked in the consummation.

And although King Witichis, with his constant mind, did not share in
the depression of his troops, he all the more clearly discerned that,
after that bloody day, he would be obliged to change the whole plan of
the siege.

The loss of the Goths was enormous; Procopius valued it at thirty
thousand dead and more than as many wounded. On every side of the city
they had exposed themselves, with utter contempt of death, to the
projectiles of the besieged, and had fallen by thousands at the
Pancratian Gate and before the Mausoleum of Hadrian.

And as, on the sixty-eight earlier attacks, the besiegers had always
suffered much more than the besieged, sheltered as were these last
behind walls and towers, the great army which, a few months before,
Witichis had led against the Eternal City had been fearfully reduced.

Besides all this, hunger and pestilence had raged in their tents for a
considerable period.

In consequence of this discouragement and the decimation of his troops,
Witichis was obliged to renounce the idea of taking the city by storm,
and his last hope--he did not conceal from himself its weakness--lay in
the possibility that famine would force the enemy to capitulate.

The country round Rome was completely exhausted, and all seemed now to
depend upon which party would be longest able to bear privation, or
which could first procure provisions from a distance.

The Goths felt severely the loss of their fleet, which had been damaged
on the coast of Dalmatia.

The first to recover from his wounds was the Prefect.

When carried away insensible from the door which he had closed with his
body, he had lain for a day and a half in a state which was half sleep,
half swoon.

When, on the evening of the second day, he again opened his eyes, his
first glance fell upon the faithful Moor, who was crouched at the foot
of the bed, and who had never ceased to watch him. The snake was twined
round his arm.

"The wooden door!" was the first scarcely audible word of the Prefect.
"The wooden door must be replaced by--marble blocks----"

"Thanks, thanks, O Snake-god!" cried the slave; "now he is saved and
thou too! And I, my master, have saved you." And he threw himself upon
the ground and kissed his master's bedstead; his feet he did not dare
to kiss.

"You have saved me? how?"

"When I laid you, as pale as death, upon this bed, I fetched my
Snake-god and showed you to him; and I said, 'Thou seest, O Snake-god,
that my master's eyes are closed. Make them open. Until thou dost so,
thou shalt not receive one drop of milk or crumb of bread. And if he
never open his eyes again--then, on the day when they burn his corpse,
Syphax will burn by his side, and thou, O great Snake-god, also. Thou
hast the power to heal him, then do so--or burn!' Thus I spoke, and he
has healed you."

"The city is safe--I feel it. Else I had never slept! Is Belisarius
alive? Where is Procopius?"

"In the library with your tribunes. According to the physician's
sentence, they expected to-day either your recovery, or your----"

"Death? This time your god has saved me, Syphax.--Let the tribunes
enter."

Very soon Piso, the Licinii, Salvius Julianus, and some others stood
before the Prefect; they would have hurried up to his couch with
emotion, but he signed to them to compose themselves.

"Rome, through me, thanks you! You have fought like--like Romans! I can
say nothing more, or more flattering."

He looked at the row of men before him reflectively, and then said:

"One is missing--ah, my Corinthian! His corpse is saved, for I
recommended it, and the two statues, to Piso. Let a slab of black
Corinthian marble be placed upon the spot where he fell; set the statue
of Apollo above the urn, and inscribe on the latter, 'Here died, for
Rome, Kallistratos of Corinth; he saved the god, and not the god him.'
Now go. We shall soon meet again upon the walls.--Syphax, send
Procopius to me. And bring a large cup of Falernian.--Friend," he cried
to Procopius as the latter entered, "it seems to me as if, before I
fell into this feverish sleep, I had heard some one whisper, 'Procopius
has saved the great Belisarius!' A deed which will give you
immortality. Posterity will thank you--therefore I need not. Sit by my
side and tell me all. But wait--first arrange my cushions, so that I
may see my Cæsar. The sight of that statue strengthens me more than
medicine. Now speak."

Procopius looked sharply at the sick man.

"Cethegus," he then said, in a grave voice, "Belisarius knows
everything."

"Everything?" said the Prefect with a smile. "That is much."

"Cease your mockery, and do not refuse admiration to nobleness of mind,
you, who yourself are noble!"

"I? I know nothing of it."

"As soon as Belisarius recovered his senses," continued Procopius,
"Bessas naturally informed him of all that had passed. He described to
him minutely how you had ordered the Tiburtinian Gate to be kept
closed, when Belisarius lay outside in his blood, with Teja raging at
his heels. He told him that you commanded that his body-guard should be
beaten down if they attempted to open the gate by force. He repeated
your every word, also your cry: 'Rome first, then Belisarius!' And he
demanded your head in the Council. I trembled; but Belisarius said: 'He
did right! Here, Procopius, take him my sword, and the armour which I
wore that day, as a sign that I thank him.' And in the report to the
Emperor he dictated these words to me: 'Cethegus saved Rome, and
Cethegus alone! Send him the patricianship of Byzantium.'"

"Many thanks! I did not save Rome for Byzantium!" observed Cethegus.

"You need not tell Belisarius that, you un-Attic Roman!"

"I am in no Attic humour, you life-preserver! What was your reward?"

"Peace. He knows nothing of it, and shall never learn it."

"Syphax, wine! I cannot bear so much magnanimity. It makes me weak.
Well, what was the joke with the ambush?"

"Friend, it was no joke, but as terrible earnest as I have ever seen.
Belisarius was saved by a hair's-breadth."

"Yes; it was one of those hairs which are always in the way of these
Goths! They are clumsy fools, one and all!"

"You speak as if you were sorry that Belisarius was not killed!"

"It would have served him right. I had warned him thrice. He ought by
this time to know what becomes an old general and what a young
brawler."

"Listen," said Procopius, looking at him earnestly. "You have won the
right to speak thus at the Mausoleum. Formerly, when you depreciated
this man's heroism----"

"You thought I spoke in envy of the brave Belisarius? Hear it, ye
immortal gods!"

"Yes; certainly your Gepidian laurels----"

"Leave those boyish deeds alone! Friend, if necessary, a man must
despise death, but else he must cherish his life carefully. For only
the living laugh and rule, not the dumb dead. This is my wisdom, call
it cowardice if you will. Therefore--there was an ambush. Tell me
briefly, how went the fight!"

"Briskly enough! After we had scoured the neighbourhood--it seemed free
from enemies and safe for foraging--we gradually turned our horses'
heads in the direction of the city, taking with us a few goats and
half-starved sheep which we had found. Belisarius went foremost with
young Severinus, Johannes, and myself. Suddenly, as we issued from the
village _ad aras Bacchi_, there came galloping out of the trees on
either side the Valerian Way a number of Gothic horsemen. I saw at once
that they far outnumbered us, and advised that we should try to rush
between them straight on the road to Rome. But Belisarius thought that
though they were many, they were not too many, so he turned to the left
to meet and break through one of their lines. But we were ill received.
The Goths fought and rode better than our Mauretanian horsemen, and
their leaders, Totila and Hildebad--I recognised the first by his
flowing yellow locks, and the last by his enormous height--made
straight at Belisarius. 'Where is Belisarius and his courage?' shouted
tall Hildebad, audible through all the clash of arms. 'Here!' at once
replied Belisarius, and before we could prevent him, he faced the
giant. The latter lost no time, but struck the general's helmet so
furiously with his heavy battle-axe, that the golden crest, with its
plume of white horse-hair, fell to the earth, and the head of
Belisarius was bowed to the saddle-bow. The giant immediately aimed a
second and fatal blow, but young Severinus came up and received the
stroke upon his round shield. The barbarian's axe pierced the shield,
and entered deeply into the noble youth's neck. He fell----"

Procopius paused, lost in painful thought.

"Dead?" asked Cethegus quietly.

"An old freedman of his father, who accompanied him, bore him out of
the fight, but I hear that he died before they could reach the
village."

"A noble death!" said Cethegus. "Syphax, a cup of wine."

"Meanwhile," continued Procopius, "Belisarius had recovered himself,
and now, thoroughly enraged, struck his spear full at Hildebad's
breast-plate, hurling him from his horse. We shouted with joy, but
young Totila----"

"Well?"

"Had scarcely seen his brother fall, than he broke furiously through
the lances of the body-guard, and attacked Belisarius. Aigan, the
standard-bearer, would have protected Belisarius, but the Goth's sword
pierced his left arm. Totila caught the banner from his powerless hand,
and threw it to the nearest Goth. Belisarius uttered a cry of rage and
turned to meet his enemy; but young Totila is quick as lightning, and
before Belisarius knew what he was about, two swift strokes fell on the
latter's shoulders. He wavered in his saddle, and then sank slowly from
his horse, which fell dead the next moment, pierced by a spear. 'Yield,
Belisarius!' cried Totila. The general had just strength enough to
shake his head, and then sank insensible. I had quickly dismounted, and
now lifted him upon my own horse, and placed him under the care of
Johannes, who rallied his body-guard about him, and carried him quickly
out of the fight to the city."

"And you?"

"I fought on foot, and I succeeded, with the aid of our rear-guard, who
now came up--we had been obliged to sacrifice our forage--in resisting
Totila. But not for long. For now the second troop of Gothic horsemen
had arrived. Like a storm of wind, up rushed the black Teja, broke
through our right wing--which stood nearest to him--then through the
front rank, which faced Totila, and dispersed our whole array. I
counted the battle lost, caught a riderless horse, and galloped after
the general. But Teja also had observed the direction of his flight,
and galloped after us. He overtook the escort at the Fulvian Bridge.
Johannes and I had placed more than half of the rest of the body-guard
on the bridge, to defend the crossing, under Principius, the brave
Pisidian, and Tarmuth, the gigantic Isaurian. There, as I heard, all
the thirty men, and, lastly, their two faithful leaders, fell by Teja's
hand alone. There fell the flower of Belisarius's body-guard; amongst
them many of my best friends: Alamundarus, the Saracen; Artasines, the
Persian; Zanter, the Arminian, and many more. But their death bought
our safety. At the other side of the bridge we overtook the foot-soldiers
we had left behind, who now checked the enemy's horse until, late enough,
the Tiburtinian Gate was opened to the wounded general. Then, as soon as
we had sent him upon a litter to Antonina, I hastened to the Mausoleum
of Hadrian--where, I had heard, the Goths had entered the city--and found
you in danger of death."

"And what has Belisarius now decided?"

"His wounds are not so dangerous as yours, and yet they heal more
slowly. He has granted to the Goths the armistice which they desired,
in order to bury their numerous dead."

Cethegus started up from his cushions.

"He should have refused it; he should have suffered no useless delay of
the final result. I know these Gothic bulls; they have blunted their
horns; they are tired and done for. Now is the time to strike the blow
which I have long contemplated. Their giant bodies can ill bear the
heat outside in the glowing plains; less can they support hunger; still
less thirst--for the German must be drinking if he be not snoring or
fighting. It is now only necessary to intimidate yet more their prudent
King. Greet Belisarius from me, and my thanks for the sword is this
advice: Send Johannes, with eight thousand men, through Picenum towards
Ravenna; the Flaminian road is open, and will be but slightly defended,
for Witichis has collected here the garrisons of all the forts, and we
can now more easily win Ravenna than the barbarians can win Rome. And
as soon as the King hears that Ravenna, his last refuge, is in danger,
he will hurry thither to save it at any cost; he will take away his
army from these impregnable walls, and will become the persecuted
instead of the persecutor."

"Cethegus," said Procopius, springing up, "you are a great general!"

"Only by the way, Procopius! Now go, and take my homage to the great
victor, Belisarius."



                              CHAPTER XIV.

On the last day of the armistice, Cethegus was again able to appear
upon the walls of the Mausoleum, where his legionaries and Isaurians
greeted him with loud cheers.

His first walk was to the monument of Kallistratos. He laid a wreath of
laurels and roses upon the black marble slab.

While he was superintending the strengthening of the fortifications
from this point, Syphax brought him a letter from Mataswintha.

The contents were laconic enough:


"Put an end to it. I cannot bear to see this misery any longer. The
sight of the interment of forty thousand of my countrymen has broken my
heart. The death-choruses all seem to accuse me. I shall succumb if
this continue. Famine rages fearfully in the camp. The army's last hope
is a large convoy of corn and cattle, which is on the way from South
Gaul. In the next calends it is expected off Portus. Act accordingly;
but make an end."

"Triumph!" said the Prefect. "The siege is over. Hitherto our little
fleet lay idle at Populonium; but now it shall have work enough. This
Queen is the Erinnys of the barbarians."

And he himself went to Belisarius, who received him with noble
generosity.

The same night--the last of the armistice--Johannes marched out of the
Pincian Gate, and wheeled to the left, towards the Flaminian high-road.
Ravenna was his goal.

And swift messengers sped by sea to Populonium, where a small Roman
squadron lay at anchor.

The fight for the city, in spite of the expiration of the armistice,
was scarcely renewed.

About a week after this the King, who was only now able to leave his
bed of pain, took his first walk through the lines of tents,
accompanied by his friends.

Three of the seven camps, formerly crowded with soldiers, were
completely desolated and abandoned; and the other four were but
sparsely populated.

Tired to death, without complaint, but also without hope, the famished
soldiers lay before their tents.

No cheer, no greeting, rejoiced the ears of their brave King upon his
painful way; the warriors scarcely raised their tired eyes at the sound
of his approaching footsteps.

From the interior of the tents sounded the loud groaning of the sick
and dying, who succumbed to wounds, hunger, and pestilence. Scarcely
could healthy men enough be found to occupy the most necessary posts.

The sentries dragged their spears behind them, too weak to carry them
upright or to lay them across their shoulders.

The leaders arrived at the outwork before the Aurelian Gate; in the
trench lay a young archer, chewing the bitter grass.

Hildebad called to him:

"By the hammer, Gunthamund! what is this? Thy bow-string has sprung;
why dost thou not bend another?"

"I cannot, sir. The string broke yesterday as I shot my last shot; and
I and my three comrades have not strength enough to bend another."

Hildebad gave him a drink from his gourd-bottle.

"Didst thou shoot at a Roman?"

"Oh no, sir!" said the man. "A rat was gnawing at that corpse down
there. I happily hit it, and we divided it between us."

"Iffaswinth, where is thine uncle Iffamer?" asked the King.

"Dead, sire. He fell behind you, as he was carrying you away from that
cursed marble tomb."

"And thy father Iffamuth?"

"Dead too. He could no longer bear the poisonous water from the
ditches. Thirst, King! burns more fiercely than hunger; and it will
never, never rain from these leaden skies."

"Are you all from the Athesis valley?"

"Yes, sire; from the Iffinger mountains. Oh! what delicious spring
water there is at home!"

Teja observed another warrior at some distance drinking from his
helmet. His features grew darker and darker.

"Hey, thou, Arulf!"  he cried to the warrior; "thou seem'st to suffer
no thirst."

"No; I often drink," said the man.

"What dost thou drink?"

"Blood from the wounds of the newly-fallen. At first it disgusts one
terribly; but in despair one gets used to it."

Witichis passed on with a shudder.

"Send all my wine into the camp, Hildebad; the sentries shall share
it."

"All thy wine? O King! my office of cup-bearer has become very light.
There are but one and a half skins left; and Hildebrand, thy physician,
says that thou must strengthen thyself."

"And who will strengthen _these_, Hildebad? They are reduced to the
state of wild animals!"

"Come back to thy tent," said Totila; "it is not good to be here." And
he put his hand on the King's shoulder.

Arrived at the tent, the friends seated themselves silently round the
beautiful marble table, upon which, in golden dishes, lay mouldy bread,
as hard as stone, and a few pieces of meat.

"It was the last horse in the royal stables," said Hildebad, "except
Boreas."

"Boreas must not be slaughtered. My wife, my child, have sat upon his
back." And Witichis rested his weary head upon both his hands. A sad
pause ensued. "Friends," the King at last began, "this cannot go on.
Our people perish before these walls. After a hard struggle, I have
come to a painful decision--"

"Do not pronounce it yet, O King!" cried Hildebad. "In a few days Earl
Odoswinth, of Cremona, will arrive with the ships, and we shall
luxuriate in good things."

"He is not yet here," said Teja.

"And will not our heavy loss of men be replaced by fresh troops when
Earl Ulithis arrives from Urbinum with the garrisons which the King has
summoned from all the forts of Ravenna, in order to fill our empty
tents?"

"Ulithis also is not yet here," said Teja. "He is said to be still in
Picenum; and if he happily arrive, then the greater will be the want."

"But the Roman city hungers too," said Hildebad, breaking the hard
bread upon the table with his fist. "Let us see who can bear it the
longest!"

"I have often wondered, during these heavy days and sleepless nights,"
the King slowly said, "why--why all this must be. I have ever
conscientiously weighed right and wrong between our enemies and us, and
I can come to no other conclusion but that we have right on our side.
And, truly, we have never failed in strength and courage."

"Thou least of all," said Totila.

"And we have grudged no sacrifice," sighed the King. "And yet if, as we
all say, there is a God in heaven, just and good and almighty, why does
He permit this enormous and undeserved misery? Why must we succumb to
Byzantium?"

"But we must not succumb!" cried Hildebad. "I have never speculated
much, about our Almighty God; but if He permits _that_ to happen, we
ought to storm heaven and overthrow His throne!"

"Do not blaspheme, my brother," said Totila. "And thou, my noble King,
take courage and trust. Yes, a good God reigns above the stars;
therefore the just cause must win at last. Courage, my Witichis; hope
till the end."

But the heart-broken man shook his head.

"I confess that I have been able to find but _one_ way out of this
error; one way to get rid of this terrible doubt of God's justice. It
cannot be that we suffer guiltless. And as our nation's cause is,
without doubt, a just one, there must be hidden guilt in me, your King.
Repeatedly, so say our heathen songs, has a King sacrificed himself for
his people when defeat, pestilence, or scarcity had persecuted the
nation for years. Then the King took upon himself the hidden sin which
seemed to weigh upon his people, and atoned by his death, or by going
sceptreless into exile, an outlawed fugitive. Let me put off the crown
from my unfortunate head. Choose another King, with whom God is not
angry; choose Totila, or----"

"Thou ravest still in the fever of thy wounds," interrupted the old
master-at-arms. "_Thou_ weighed down with guilt--thou, the most
faithful of all? No! I tell you, you children of too young days, who
have lost the old strength of your fathers with your fathers' old
belief, and now know of no comfort for your hearts--I tell you, your
distrustful speeches grieve me!" and his eyes flashed with a strange
radiance as he continued, "All that rejoices or pains us here upon
earth is scarcely worth our notice. Here below there is but one thing
necessary, and that is, to have been a true man, and no perjurer, and
to die on the battle-field, and not upon a straw bed. Then the Walkyri
bear the faithful hero from the bloody field, and carry him on rosy
clouds to Odin's halls, where the Einheriar greet him with full cups.
There he daily rides forth at dawn to the hunting-field or the
fencing-court, and at eve he returns to the banquet and the song in the
golden halls. And lovely virgins caress the youths, and the elders chat
about wise primeval times with the old primeval heroes. And there I
shall meet again all the valiant companions of my youth; bold Winithar
and Waltharis of Aquitania, and Guntharis of Burgundy. There I shall
again behold him for whom I have so longed. Sir Beowulf; and I shall
see the Cheruskians of ancient days, the first who ever beat the
Romans, and of whom the singer of the Saxons still sings. And again I
shall carry the shield and spear of my master, the King with the eagle
eyes. And thus we shall live for all eternity in light and joy, the
earth below and all its woes forgotten."

"A fine poem, old heathen!" said Totila, with a smile. "But if all this
can no longer console us for actual and heart-rending suffering? Speak
thou also, Teja, thou gloomy guest. What is thy opinion of our sorrows?
Thy sword never fails us; why dost thou withhold thy words? What makes
thy comforting harp dumb, thou singer of singers?"

"My words?" answered Teja, rising; "my words and my thoughts would be
perhaps harder to bear than all our suffering. Let me yet be silent, my
sun-bright Totila. Perhaps a day will come when I may answer thee.
Perhaps, also, I may once more play on my harp, if but a string will
vibrate."

And he left the tent; for outside in the camp a confused and
inexplicable noise of calling and questioning voices arose. The friends
looked silently after Teja.

"I guess his thoughts," at last said old Hildebrand, "for I have known
him from his boyhood. He is not as other men. And in the Northland
there are many who think like him, who do not believe in Thor and Odin,
but only in necessity and in their own strength. It is almost too heavy
a burden for a human heart to bear, and it makes no one happy to think
as he does. I wonder that he can sing and play the harp
notwithstanding."

Just then Teja, returning, tore open the curtain of the tent; his face
was still paler than before; his dark eyes flashed; but his voice was
as quiet as ever as he said:

"Break up the camp. King Witichis. Our ships have fallen into the
enemy's hands at Ostia. They have sent the head of Earl Odoswinth into
the camp. And upon the walls of Rome, before the very eyes of our
sentinels, they slaughter the cattle taken from the Goths. Large
reinforcements from Byzantium, under Valerian and Euthalius--Huns,
Slaves and Antians--have been brought into the Tiber by many ships. For
Johannes has marched through Picenum."

"And Earl Ulithis?"

"Has been killed and his troops beaten. Ancona and Ariminum are taken,
and----"

"Is that not yet all?" cried the King.

"No, Witichis. Johannes threatens Ravenna, He is only a few miles
distant from that city. And urgent haste is necessary."



                              CHAPTER XV.

The day after the arrival of this news, so fateful for the Goths, King
Witichis abandoned the siege of Rome and led his thoroughly
disheartened troops out of the four remaining camps.

The siege had lasted a whole year and nine days. All courage and
strength, exertion and sacrifice, had been unavailing.

Silently the Goths marched past the proud walls, against which their
power and good-fortune had been wrecked. Silently they suffered the
taunting words cast at them from the battlements by Romans and
Byzantines.

They were too much absorbed by their grief and rage to feel hurt by
such mockery. But when the horsemen of Belisarius, issuing from the
Pincian Gate, would have pursued them, they were fiercely repulsed, for
Earl Teja led the Gothic rearguard.

So the Gothic army, avoiding the strongholds occupied by the
enemy--Narnia, Spoletium and Perusia--marched with expedition from Rome
through Picenum to Ravenna, where they arrived in time to crush the
dangerous symptoms of rebellion among the population, some of whom,
upon hearing of the misfortunes of the barbarians, had already entered
into secret negotiations with Johannes.

As the Goths approached the latter withdrew into the fortress of
Ariminum, his last important conquest.

In Ancona lay Konon, the navarchus of Belisarius, with the Thracian
spearmen and many ships of war.

The King, however, had not taken to Ravenna the whole of the army which
had besieged Rome, but had, during the march, left several regiments to
garrison the fortresses which he passed.

One thousand men he had left under Gibimer in Clusium; another thousand
in Urbs Vetus, under Albila; five hundred men in Tudertum under
Wulfgis; in Auximum four thousand men under Earl Wisand, the brave
bandalarius; in Urbinum two thousand under Morra; and in Cæsena and
Monsferetrus five hundred.

He sent Hildebrand to Verona, Totila to Tarvisium, and Teja to Ticinum,
for the north-eastern part of the peninsula was also endangered by
Byzantine troops, coming from Istria.

In acting thus he had been also influenced by other reasons. He wished
first of all to check Belisarius on his march to Ravenna. Secondly, he
was afraid, in case of a siege, that if all his troops were with him,
they would speedily be exposed to the evils of starvation, and, lastly,
he wished to attack the besiegers in their rear from various sides.

His plan was to occupy his stronghold of Ravenna, limiting himself to
defensive proceedings until the foreign troops which he expected,
Longobardians and Franks, should place him in a position to take the
open field.

But his hope of checking Belisarius on his way to Ravenna was
disappointed, for the Byzantine contented himself with investing all
the Gothic fortresses with a portion of his army, marching on with the
main army to the capital city and last important refuge of the Goths.

"If I have mortally wounded the heart," he said, "the clenched fists
will open of themselves."

And so, very soon, the tents of the Byzantines were seen stretching in
a wide semicircle round the royal residence of Theodoric, from the
harbour-town of Classis to the canals and branches of the Padus, which,
particularly to the west, formed a natural line of defence.

The old aristocratic city had indeed, even at that time, lost much of
the glory in which it had rejoiced for nearly two centuries as the
residence of the Roman emperors; and the last rays which the splendid
reign of Theodoric had shed over it, were extinguished since the
breaking out of the war.

But even thus, what a different impression must the still
thickly-populated city--similar to the present Venice--have made at
that period, in comparison with its aspect at present; when the
interior of the city, with its silent streets, its deserted squares and
its lonely basilicas, appears to the beholder no less melancholy than
the plain outside the walls, where the desolate and marshy levels of
the Padus stretch far away, until they are lost in the mud of the
receding sea.

Where once the harbour-town of Classis was filled with active life on
land and sea; where the proud triremes of the royal fleet of Ravenna
rocked on the blue waters, now lie swampy meadows, in whose tall reeds
and grass the wild buffalo feeds; the streets foul with stagnant water;
the harbour choked with sand; the once joyous population vanished; only
one gigantic tower of the time of the Goths still stands near the sole
remaining Basilica, of Saint Apollonaris in _Classe fuori_, which,
commenced by Witichis and completed by Justinian, now rises sadly out
of the marshy plain, far from any human abode.

In the time of which our story speaks the strong fortress was
considered impregnable, and for that reason the emperors, when their
power began to decay, had chosen it for their residence.

The south-eastern side was at that time protected by the sea, which
rolled its waves to the very foot of the walls, and on the other three
sides nature and art had spun a labyrinthine network of canals,
ditches, and swamps, begotten by the many-armed Padus, among which all
besiegers were hopelessly entangled.

And the walls! Even yet their mighty ruins fill the traveller with
amazement. Their colossal width, and less their height than the number
of strong round towers, which even now (1863) rise above the
battlements, defied, before the invention of gunpowder, every means of
attack.

It was only by starving the city that, after a resistance of nearly
four years, the great Theodoric won this, Odoacer's last place of
refuge.

In vain had Belisarius attempted to take the city by storm, as soon as
he had reached the walls.

His attack was bravely repulsed, and he was obliged to content himself
with closely investing the fortress, in order by cutting off all
supplies, as had formerly been done by Theodoric, to force that city to
capitulate.

But Witichis was able to look upon this proceeding with composure, for,
with the prudence which was peculiar to him, he had, before marching to
Rome, heaped up provisions of all kinds, principally corn, in
extraordinary quantities. He had stored them in granaries built of wood
and erected within the walls of the immense marble Circus of
Theodosius. These extensive wooden edifices, situated exactly opposite
to the palace and the Basilica of Saint Apollonaris, were the pride,
joy, and comfort of the King.

It had been impossible to convey much of the provisions to the army
before Rome, and with reasonable economy these magazines would without
doubt suffice for the wants of the population and the no longer
formidable army for another two or three months.

By that time the Goths expected the arrival of an allied army, in
consequence of the newly-opened negotiations with the Franks. On its
arrival the siege would necessarily be raised.

But Belisarius and Cethegus knew or guessed this as well as Witichis,
and they indefatigably sought on all sides for some means of hastening
the fall of the city.

The Prefect, of course, tried to make use of his secret relations with
the Queen for the furtherance of this end. But, on the one hand,
communication with Mataswintha had become very difficult, for the Goths
carefully guarded all the entrances to the city; and, on the other
hand, Mataswintha herself seemed greatly changed, and no longer so
ready and willing as before to allow herself to be used as a tool.

She had expected the speedy destruction or humiliation of the King. The
long delay wearied her, and, at the same time, the immense suffering of
her people had begun to shake her resolution. Lastly, the sad change in
the manner of the usually strong and healthy King, the resigned but
profound grief which he evidently felt, touched her heart.

Although she accused him, with all the injustice of pain and the bitter
pride of insulted love, of having rejected her heart and yet forced her
to give him her hand; although she believed that she hated him with all
the passion of her nature, and did indeed in some sort hate him, yet
this hatred was only love reversed.

And now, when she saw him humbled by the terrible misfortunes of the
Gothic army and the failure of all his plans--to which failure she had
so greatly contributed by her own treason--so humbled, that his mind
had begun to be affected by sickly melancholy, and he tormented himself
with reproaches; the sight powerfully affected her impulsive nature,
strangely compounded as it was of the contradictory elements of
tenderness and harshness.

In the first moment of angry grief, she would have seen his blood flow
with delight. But to see him slowly devoured by self-reproach and
gnawing pain that she could not endure.

This softer feeling on her part had, besides, been greatly brought
about by her having noticed, since their arrival in Ravenna, a change
in the King's behaviour towards herself.

She thought that she observed in him traces of remorse for having so
forcibly encroached upon her life, and she involuntarily softened her
harsh and blunt manner to him during their rare interviews, which
always took place in the presence of witnesses.

Witichis considered the change as a sign that a step had been taken
towards reconciliation, and silently acknowledged and rewarded it, on
his part, by a more friendly manner.

All this was sufficient to induce Mataswintha, with her emotional
nature, to repulse the overtures of the Prefect, even when they
sometimes reached her by means of the clever Moor.

Now the Prefect had already learned from Syphax during the march to
Ravenna, that which was known later by other means, namely, that the
Goths expected assistance from the Franks.

He had therefore forthwith renewed his old and intimate relations
with the aristocrats and great men who ruled in the name of the
mock Kings of the Merovingians in the courts of Mettis (Metz),
Aurelianum (Orleans) and Suessianum (Soissons), in order to induce the
Franks--whose perfidy, even then become a proverb, gave good hope that
his efforts would be successful--to renounce the Gothic alliance.

And when the affair had been properly introduced by these friends, he
himself wrote to King Theudebald, who held his court in Mettis,
impressively warning him of the risk he would run if he supported such
a ruined cause as that of the Goths had undeniably become since their
ill-success in the siege of Rome.

This letter had been accompanied by rich gifts to his old friend, the
Major Domus of the weak-minded King, and the Prefect impatiently
waited, day by day, for the reply; the more impatiently because the
altered demeanour of Mataswintha had cut off all the hopes he had
entertained of effecting a more speedy conquest of the Goths.

The answer came--at the same time with an imperial letter from
Byzantium--on a day which was equally pregnant with the fate of the
heroes both in and out of Ravenna.



                              CHAPTER XVI.

Hildebad, impatient at the long pause of idleness, had, one day at
dawn, made a sudden sally upon the Byzantines from the Porta Faventina,
which was under his special command. He had at first won great
advantages, had burnt a portion of the enemies' implements of siege,
and had spread terror all around.

He would, without doubt, have done still more mischief had not
Belisarius, hurrying up, displayed at once all his heroism and
generalship.

Without helmet or armour, just as he had hurried from his tent, he had
first checked his own flying outposts, and had then thrown himself upon
the Gothic pursuers, and by the utmost personal exertion had brought
the fight to a standstill.

Afterwards he had man[oe]uvred his two flanks so cleverly, that
Hildebad's retreat was greatly endangered, and the Goths were obliged
to retreat speedily into the city.

Cethegus, who lay encamped before the Porta Honorius with his
Isaurians, had found, on hastening to the assistance of Belisarius,
that the fight was already over. He could not, therefore, avoid paying
a visit to the commander-in-chief in his tent, in order to express his
admiration of the heroes conduct, both as a general and a soldier;
praise which was greedily listened to by Antonina.

"Really, Belisarius," concluded the Prefect, "Emperor Justinian can
never requite your valour sufficiently."

"There you speak truly," answered Belisarius haughtily; "he can only
requite me by his friendship. The mere honour of bearing his marshal's
staff would never have induced me to do that which I have already
done, and shall yet accomplish. I do it only because I really love him.
With all his failings, he is a great man. If he could but learn one
thing--to trust me! But patience--he will learn it in time."

Just then Procopius entered, bringing a letter for Belisarius, which
had been delivered by an imperial messenger.

With a countenance beaming with delight, Belisarius, forgetting his
fatigue, sprang from his cushions, kissed the letter, and with his
dagger cut the purple cord which tied it. He unfolded the paper with
the words:

"From my Emperor himself! Ah, now he will send me the gold and the rest
of the body-guard!"

And he began to read.

Antonina, Procopius, and Cethegus observed him attentively. His
features grew darker and darker; his broad chest began to heave; both
the hands with which he held the letter trembled.

Antonina anxiously approached him, but before she could question him,
Belisarius uttered a low cry of rage, cast the letter on the ground,
and rushed madly out of the tent. His wife followed him.

"Antonina alone dare now approach him," said Procopius, as he picked up
the letter. "Let us see; no doubt it is another piece of imperial
gratitude." And he glanced over the letter. "The commencement is, as
usual, mere phrases. Ah, now comes something better: 'Notwithstanding,
we cannot deny that we expected, according to your own former boasts,
a more speedy termination to the war against these barbarians;
and we believe that, with greater exertion, this would not have
been impossible. For this reason we cannot comply with your
repeatedly-expressed wish to have the remaining five thousand
body-guards sent from Persia, and the four thousand centenari of gold
which lie in your palace at Byzantium. Certainly, both, as you rather
superfluously remark in your letter, are your own property; and your
offer to carry this war to a conclusion, paying the expenses out of
your own purse, because of the existing exhaustion of the imperial
exchequer, is worthy of all praise. As, however, all your property, as
you more justly add in the aforesaid letter, is at the service of your
Emperor, and as your Emperor considers the desired employment of your
treasure and body-guard in Italy superfluous, we have decided to
appropriate it otherwise, and have already sent troops and treasure to
your colleague, Narses, to be used in the Persian wars.' Ha! this is
unheard of!" cried Procopius, interrupting himself.

Cethegus smiled. "It is a tyrant's thanks for the services of a slave!"

"And the end seems to be just as pleasant," continued Procopius. "'An
increase of your power in Italy seems to us the less desirable, because
we are daily warned against your boundless ambition. You are reported
to have said lately, while sitting at wine, that the sceptre originated
in the general's staff, and the general's staff in the stick. Dangerous
thoughts and unseemly words! You see that we are faithfully informed of
your ambitious dreams. This time we will warn without punishing; but we
have no desire to furnish you with more wood for your general's staff;
and we would remind you that the tree, which most proudly tosses its
summit, is nearest to the imperial lightning.' It is shameful!" cried
Procopius.

"No, it is worse; it is silly!" said Cethegus. "It is whipping fidelity
into rebellion."

"You are right!" cried Belisarius, who had caught these words as he
again rushed into the tent. "Oh, he deserves that I should desert him,
the base, ungrateful, wicked tyrant!"

"Be silent, for God's sake! You will ruin yourself!" cried Antonina,
who had entered with her husband, and now tried to take his hand.

"No, I will not be silent!" cried the angry man, as he paced to and fro
close to the open door of the tent, before which Bessas, Acacius,
Demetrius, and many other leaders stood listening in astonishment. "All
the world shall hear me! He is an ungrateful, malicious tyrant! He
deserves that I should overthrow him! that I should confirm the
suspicions of his false soul!"

Cethegus cast a look at those who stood outside; they had evidently
heard all. Glancing at Antonina, he now went to the door and closed it
carefully. Antonina thanked him by a look. She again drew near her
husband, but he had thrown himself upon the ground before his couch,
striking his clenched fist upon his brow and stammering:

"O Justinian! have I deserved this from you? It is too much, too much!"

And the strong man burst into tears.

At this Cethegus contemptuously turned away.

"Farewell," he said in a low voice to Procopius, "It disgusts me to see
men blubber!"



                             CHAPTER XVII.

Lost in thought, the Prefect left the tent, and went round the camp to
the rather distant outwork, where he had entrenched himself and his
Isaurians before the Gate of Honorius.

It was situated on the south side of the city, near the harbour wall of
Classis, and the way led partly along the sea-shore.

Although the lonely wanderer was at this moment preoccupied by the
great thought which had become the pulse of his life, although he was
oppressed by anxiety as to how Belisarius--that man of impulse--would
act, and worried with impatience for the arrival of the answer from the
Franks, his attention was yet involuntarily attracted by the singular
appearance of the landscape, the sky, and the sea.

It was October; but the season had seemed for weeks to have altered its
laws. For almost two months it had never rained. Not a cloud, not a
stripe of mist had been seen in this usually so humid part of the
country. But now, quite suddenly--it was towards sunset--Cethegus
remarked in the east, above the sea horizon, a single, dense, and
coal-black cloud.

The setting sun, although free from mist, shed no rays.

Not a breath of air rippled the leaden surface of the sea; not the
smallest wavelet played upon the strand.

Not an olive-leaf moved in all the wide plain; not even the
easily-shaken reeds in the marshy ditches trembled.

No cry of an animal, no flight of a bird could be heard or perceived;
and a strange choking smell, as if of sulphur, seemed to lie
oppressively over land and sea, and to check respiration. The mules and
horses in the camp kicked uneasily against the posts to which they were
tied. A few camels and dromedaries, which Belisarius had brought with
him from Africa, buried their heads in the sand.

The wanderer heaved a deep breath, and looked about him in surprise.

"How sultry! Just as it is before the 'wind of death' arises in the
deserts of Egypt," he said to himself. "Sultry everywhere--outside and
inside. Upon whose head will the long-withheld fury of Nature and
Passion be let loose?"

He entered his tent.

Syphax accosted him.

"Sir, if I were at home, I should think that the poisonous breath of
the God of the Desert was coming over us." And he handed a letter to
the Prefect.

It was the answer of the King of the Franks. Hastily Cethegus tore open
the great shining seal.

"Who brought it?"

"An ambassador, who, as he did not find you, immediately asked to be
conducted to Belisarius. He desired to go the shortest way--through the
camp."

So thus Cethegus had missed him.

He read eagerly:


"'Theudebald, King of the Franks, to Cethegus, the Prefect of Rome.

"'You have addressed to us wise words, and still wiser words you have
not trusted to the letter, but have sent to us through our Major Domus.
We are not disinclined to act accordingly. We accept your advice, and
the gifts which accompany it. Their misfortunes have dissolved our
treaty with the Goths. They may blame their evil fate and not our
withdrawal. Whom Heaven forsakes, men, if they be pious and wise,
should forsake also. It is true that the Goths have paid beforehand the
price for the army of alliance. But, in our eyes, that is no hindrance.
We will keep the treasure as a pledge, until such time as they shall
cede to us the towns in South Gaul, which lie within the frontier
formed by God and nature for the kingdom of the Franks. But, as we have
prepared for a campaign, and our brave soldiers, who already scent the
battle, would but impatiently bear the tedium of peace and might become
dangerous, we are inclined, notwithstanding, to send our valiant troops
over the Alps. Only, instead of fighting _for_ the Goths, they will
fight against them. However, we do not wish to serve the Emperor
Justinian, who continually denies us the title of King, and inscribes
himself on his coins, 'Master of Gaul;' who will not allow us to
impress our own image on our own coins; and has offered other
unbearable affronts to our dignity. We rather think of extending our
own power in Italy. Now, as we well know that the whole strength of the
Emperor in that country is embodied in his commander-in-chief,
Belisarius, and that the latter has a great number of old and new
injuries to complain of, inflicted by his ungrateful master, we shall
propose to the hero, Belisarius, to set himself up as Emperor of the
West, to which end we will send him an army of a hundred thousand
Frankish heroes. In return, we desire the cession of only a small part
of Italy, extending from our frontier to Genoa. We hold it to be
impossible that any mortal can refuse such an offer. In case you will
co-operate with us, we promise you a sum of twelve centenari of gold;
and, upon a return payment of two centenari, we shall place your name
on the list of our messmates. The ambassador who brings you this
letter--Duke Lintharis--has our order to communicate with Belisarius.'"


Cethegus had read to the end with difficulty. He now broke out:

"Such an offer at such a moment! In such a humour! He will accept it!
Emperor of the West, with a hundred thousand Prankish warriors! He must
not live!"

And he hurried to the door of his tent; but he suddenly checked
himself.

"Fool that I am!" he laughed, "Still so hot-blooded? He is Belisarius,
and not Cethegus! He will not accept. He can rebel as little as the
moon can rebel against the earth, or a tame house-dog suddenly become a
raging wolf. He will not accept! But now let us see to what purpose we
can put the cupidity and falsity of this Merovingian. No, King of the
Franks!" and he looked bitterly at the crumpled letter. "As long as
Cethegus lives, not a foot of Italian soil shall you have!"

He paced rapidly through his tent.

Another turn--with a slower step.

And a third--then he stood still, and over his mighty brow came a flash
of light.

"I have it!" he joyously cried. "Syphax," he called, "go and fetch
Procopius."

As he again paced the tent, his eyes fell upon the fallen letter of the
Merovingian.

"No," he laughed triumphantly, as he took it up from the ground. "No,
King of the Franks, you shall not win as much of Italy's holy soil as
is covered by this letter."

Procopius soon appeared. The two men sat talking earnestly through the
whole night.

Procopius was startled at the bold and daring plans of the Prefect, and
for some time refused to enter into them. But the genius of the man
held him fast, overcame every objection before it was expressed, and at
last he was so entangled in an inextricable network of argument, that
he lost all power of resistance.

The stars were pale, and the dawn illumined the east with a grey stripe
of light, when Procopius took leave of his friend.

"Cethegus," he said, rising, "I admire you. If I were not the historian
of Belisarius, I should like to be yours."

"It would be more interesting," said the Prefect quietly, "but more
difficult."

"But," continued Procopius, "I cannot help shuddering at the biting
acrimony of your spirit. It is a sign of the times in which we live. It
is like a poisonous but brilliant flower in a swamp. When I recollect
how you have ruined the Gothic King by means of his own wife----"

"I have something to tell you about that. Lately I have heard very
little from my fair ally----"

"Your ally? Your ways are----"

"Always practical."

"But not always---- But never mind. I am with you--for yet a little
while, for I wish to get my hero out of Italy as soon as possible. He
shall gather laurels in Persia instead of thorns here. But I will only
go with you as far----"

"As it suits you, of course."

"Enough! I will at once speak with Antonina. I do not doubt of success.
She is tired to death here. She burns with desire, not only to see many
an old friend in Byzantium, but also to ruin the enemies of her
husband."

"A good bad wife!"

"But Witichis? Do you think he will believe a rebellion on the part of
Belisarius possible?"

"King Witichis is a good soldier, but a poor psychologist. I know a
much cleverer man, who yet, for a moment, believed it possible.
Besides, you will bring proofs in writings and just now, forsaken as he
is by the Franks--the water is up to his neck--he will snatch at any
straw. Therefore I, also, do not doubt of success. Only make sure of
Antonina----"

"That shall be my care. At mid-day I hope to enter Ravenna as an
ambassador."

"Good--and do not forget to speak to the lovely Queen."



                             CHAPTER XVIII.

At mid-day Procopius rode into Ravenna.

He carried with him four letters: the letter of Justinian to
Belisarius, the letters of the King of the Franks to Cethegus and
Belisarius, and a letter from Belisarius to Witichis.

This last had been written by Procopius and dictated by Cethegus.

The ambassador had no suspicion of the mood in which he should find the
King of the Goths and his beautiful Queen.

The healthy but simple mind of the King had begun to darken, if not to
despair, under the pressure of continual misfortune. The murder of his
only child, the terrible wrench of parting from his beloved wife, had
shaken him to the very soul; but he had borne it all in the hope of
securing victory to the Goths.

And now this victory obstinately tarried.

In spite of all efforts, the state of his people became more hopeless
every month. With the single exception of the battle fought and won on
the march to Rome, fortune had never smiled upon the Goths.

The siege of Rome, undertaken with such proud hopes, had ended in a
woeful retreat and the loss of three-fourths of the army. New strokes
of fortune, bad news that followed each other like rapid blows,
increased the King's depression, until it degenerated into a state of
dull despair.

Almost all Italy, except Ravenna, was lost. Belisarius, while yet in
Rome, had sent a fleet to Genoa, under the command of Mundila the
Herulian, and Ennes the Isaurian. The troops had landed without
resistance, had conquered the sea-ruling harbour of Genoa, and, from
that point, almost all Liguria.

Datius, the Bishop of Mediolanum, himself invited the Byzantines to
that important city. Thence they easily won Bergomum, Comum, and
Novaria.

On the other side, the discouraged Goths in Clusium and the half-ruined
Dertona surrendered to the besiegers and were led prisoners out of
Italy.

Urbinum, after a brave resistance, was taken by the Byzantines; also
Forum Cornelii and the whole district of Æmilia by Johannes. The Goths
failed to retake Ancona, Ariminum, and Mediolanum.

Still worse news presently arrived to increase the despondency of the
King. For meanwhile famine was making ravages in the wide districts of
Æmilia, Picenum and Tuscany.

There were neither men, cattle, nor horses to serve the plough. The
people fled into the woods and mountains, made bread of acorns, and
devoured grass and weeds.

Devastating maladies were the consequence of insufficient or
unwholesome nourishment.

In Picenum alone perished fifty thousand souls; a still greater number
succumbed to hunger and pestilence on the other side of the Ionian
Gulf, in Dalmatia, Pale and thin, those still living tottered to the
grave; their skins became black and like leather; their glassy eyes
started from the sockets; their intestines burned as if with fire.

The vultures despised the corpses of the victims of pestilence;
but human flesh was devoured by men. Mothers killed and ate their
newly-born children.

In a farm near Ariminum only two Roman women had remained alive. These
women murdered and devoured, one after another, seventeen men, who,
singly, had sought a shelter in their house. The eighteenth awoke as
they were about to strangle him in his sleep. He killed the fiendish
women, and discovered the fate of their earlier victims.

Lastly, the hopes placed in the Franks and Longobardians were utterly
destroyed.

The Franks, who had already received large sums for the promised army
of alliance, were silent. The messengers of the King, who were sent to
urge the fulfilment of their promise, were detained at Mettis,
Aurelianum, and Paris; no answer came from these courts.

The King of the Longobardians sent word that he could decide nothing
without the consent of his warlike son Alboin. That the latter was
absent in search of adventures. Perhaps he would at some time reach
Italy; he was an intimate friend of Narses. Then he could observe the
country for himself, and advise his father and his countrymen as to the
course to be taken.

It is true that the important fortress of Auximum withstood, for
months, all the efforts of the powerful army which besieged it under
Belisarius, accompanied by Procopius. But it wrung the King's heart
when a messenger (who had, with much difficulty, stolen his way through
the two investing armies to Ravenna) brought him the following message
from the heroic Earl Wisand:

"When Auximum was entrusted to my care, thou saidst that therewith I
should hold the keys of Ravenna; yea, of the kingdom. Thou badest me
resist manfully until thou camest thyself with thy whole army to my
assistance. We have manfully resisted not only Belisarius, but famine.
Where is thy relief? Woe to us if thy words are true, and with this
fortress the keys of our kingdom fall into the enemy's hands! Come
therefore, and help us; more for the kingdom's sake than for our own!"

This messenger was soon followed by a second: Burcentius, a soldier
belonging to the besieging army, who had been bribed with much gold.
His message ran--the short letter was written in blood:

"We have now only the weeds that grow between the stones to eat. We
cannot hold out longer than four days more."


As this last messenger was returning with the King's reply, he fell
into the hands of the besiegers, who burnt him alive in sight of the
Goths before the walls of Auximum.

And the King could give no help.

The small party of Goths in Auximum still resisted, although Belisarius
cut off the supply of water by destroying the aqueducts and poisoning
the remaining wells with the corpses of men and animals, thrown in with
lime.

Wisand still fiercely repelled every attack. On one of these occasions
Belisarius only escaped death at the sacrifice of one of his
body-guard.

Finally, Cæsena, the last of the Gothic towns on the Æmilia, was the
first to fall; and then Fæsulæ, which was besieged by Cyprianus and
Justinus.

"My poor Fæsulæ!" exclaimed the King, when he learned this last
disaster, for he had been the Count of that town, and close to it lay
the house where he had lived so happily with Rauthgundis;--"My poor
Fæsulæ! the Huns will run riot in my deserted home!"

When, later, the garrison taken prisoner at Fæsulæ were led in chains
before the eyes of the defenders of Auximum, and reported to the latter
the hopelessness of any relief from Ravenna, the famished troops of
Wisand compelled him to surrender.

He stipulated for himself a free escort to Ravenna. His men were led
prisoners out of Italy.

And, so deeply sunk was the courage and patriotism of the conquered
troops, that, led by Earl Sisifrid of Sarsina, they accepted service
against their own countrymen under the flag of Belisarius.

The victor had strongly garrisoned Auximum and then led the army back
to the camp before Ravenna, where he now again took the command, which
had been entrusted to Cethegus during his absence.

It was as if a curse rested upon the head of the Gothic King, who so
sorely felt the weight of his crown.

As he could not ascribe the cause of his failure to any weakness or
oversight on his own part; as he did not doubt in the justice of the
Gothic cause, and as his simple piety could see nothing but the hand of
Heaven in all his misfortunes, he conceived the torturing thought that
God was punishing the Goths for some unforgiven sin committed by
himself, a conviction imparted to his conscience by the then dominating
doctrine of the Old Testament no less than by many features of the old
Germanic legends.

Day and night the King was tortured by this idea, which undermined his
strength and resolution. Now he tried to discover his secret guilt; now
he reflected how he could at least turn aside the curse from his
people.

He would long since have abdicated, but that such an act at such a
moment would have been considered cowardly both by himself and others.
So this escape from his misery--the quickest and best--was closed to
him.

His soul was bowed to the very earth. He often sat motionless for
hours, silent and staring at vacancy; at times shaking his head or
sighing deeply.

The daily recurring sight of this resigned suffering, this dumb and
hopeless bearing of an oppressive fate, was not, as we have said,
without effect on Mataswintha. She thought that lately the eyes of
Witichis rested upon her with an expression of sorrow and even of
beneficence.

And vague hope--which is so difficult to destroy in a living
heart--remorse and compassion, attracted her more powerfully than ever
to the suffering King.

They were now often thrown together by some common errand of mercy.

For some weeks the inhabitants of Ravenna had begun to suffer want,
while the besiegers ruled the sea from Ancona, and received plentiful
provisions from Calabria and Sicily.

None but rich citizens could afford to pay the high price asked for
corn.

The King's kind heart did not hesitate, when he had provided his
troops, to share the wealth of his magazines--which, as we have seen,
contained sufficient for the wants of all for more than double the time
required for the arrival of the Franks--amongst the poor of the city.
He also hoped for the arrival of many ships laden with corn, which the
Goths had collected in the northern districts of the Padus, and which
lay in that river, waiting for an opportunity to reach Ravenna.

In order to avoid any misuse of his bounty, or extravagance in the
granting of rations, the King himself superintended the distribution;
and Mataswintha, who one day met him among the groups of grateful
people, placed herself near him upon the marble steps of the Basilica
of Saint Apollonaris, and helped him to fill the baskets with bread.

It was a touching sight to see this royal pair standing before the
church doors, distributing their gift to the people.

As they were standing thus, Mataswintha remarked among the crowd--for
many country-people had fled to the city from all sides--sitting upon
the lowest step of the Basilica, a woman in a simple brown mantle,
which was half drawn over her head.

This woman did not press forward with the others to demand bread, but
leaned against a high sarcophagus, with her head resting upon her hand,
and, half concealed by the corner pillar of the Basilica, looked
sharply and fixedly at the Queen.

Mataswintha thought that the woman was restrained by fear, pride, or
shame, from mixing with the more importunate beggars who pushed and
crowded each other upon the steps, and she gave Aspa a basket of bread,
telling her to go down and give it to the woman. With care she heaped
up the sweet-scented bread with both her hands.

As she looked up, she met the eye of the King, which rested upon her
with a more soft and friendly expression than she had ever seen before.

She started slightly, and the blood rushed into her cheeks as she cast
down her beautiful eyes.

When she again looked up and glanced towards the woman in the brown
mantle, she perceived that the place by the sarcophagus was empty. The
woman had disappeared.

She had not observed, while filling the basket, that a man, clad in a
buffalo-skin and a steel cap, who had been standing behind the woman,
had caught her arm and drawn her away with gentle violence.

"Come," he had said; "this is no place for thee."

And, as if in a dream, the woman had answered:

"By God, she is wonderfully lovely!"

"I thank thee, Mataswintha," said the King, in a friendly manner, when
the rations for the day had been distributed.

The look, the tone, the words, penetrated her heart.

Never before had he called her by her name; he had ever met and spoken
to her only as the "Queen."

How happy those few words from his mouth had made her; and yet how
heavily his kindness weighed upon her guilty soul!

Evidently she had earned his more affectionate feeling by her active
compassion for the poor.

"Oh, he is good!" she cried to herself, half weeping with emotion. "I
also will be good!"

As, occupied by this thought, she entered the court of the left wing of
the palace, which was assigned to her--the King inhabited the right
wing--Aspa hurried to meet her.

"A messenger from the camp," she eagerly whispered. "He brings a secret
message from the Prefect--a letter, in Syphax's handwriting--in our
language. He waits for a reply."

"Leave me!" cried Mataswintha, frowning. "I will hear and read
nothing.--But who are these?" And she pointed to the steps leading from
the court to her apartments.

There, upon the cold stones, crouched women, children, and sick people,
clothed in rags--a group of misery.

"Beggars," said Aspa; "poor people. They have lain there the whole
morning. They will not be driven away."


"They shall not be driven away," said Mataswintha, drawing near.

"Bread, Queen! Bread, daughter of the Amelungs!" cried many voices.

"Give them gold, Aspa. All that thou hast with thee; and fetch----"

"Bread, bread. Queen--not gold! No more bread is to be had for money in
all the city."

"It is dispensed freely outside the King's magazines. I have just come
thence. Why were you not there?"

"Queen! we could not get through the crowd," said a haggard woman. "I
am aged, and my daughter here is sick, and that old man is blind. The
strong and young push us away. For three days we tried to go in vain.
We could not get through."

"Yes, and we starve," grumbled the old man. "O Theodoric! my lord and
King, where art thou? Under thy rule we had enough and to spare!
Then the poor and sick were not deprived of bread. But this unhappy
King----"

"Be silent," said Mataswintha. "The King, my husband"--and a lovely
flush rose into her cheeks--"does more than you deserve. Wait here. I
will bring you bread. Follow me, Aspa." And she hastened away.

"Whither goest thou?" asked the slave, astonished.

Mataswintha drew her veil closely over her face as she answered:

"To the King!"

When she reached the antechamber of the King's apartments, the
door-keeper, who recognised her with amazement, begged her to wait a
moment.

"An ambassador from Belisarius has been admitted to a private audience.
He has been in the room already for some time, and no doubt will soon
leave it."

Just then the door of the King's apartment was opened, and Procopius
stood hesitating upon the threshold.

"King of the Goths," he said, as he once again turned round, "is that
your last word?"

"My last; as it was my first," answered the King, with dignity.

"I will give you time--I will remain in Ravenna till to-morrow----"

"From this moment you are welcome as a guest, but not as an
ambassador."

"I repeat: if the city be taken by storm, all the Goths who are taller
than the sword of Belisarius--he has sworn it--will be killed! The
women and children will be sold into slavery. You understand that
Belisarius will suffer no barbarians in _his_ Italy. The death of a
hero may be tempting to you, but think of the helpless people--their
blood will accuse you before the throne of God----"

"Ambassador, you, as well as we, are in God's hand. Farewell."

And these words were uttered with such majesty, that the Byzantine was
obliged to go, however reluctantly.

The simple dignity of the King had had a strong effect upon him; but
still more upon the listening Queen.

As Procopius slowly shut the door, he saw Mataswintha standing before
him, and started back, dazzled by her great beauty. He greeted her
reverently.

"You are the Queen of the Goths!" he said. "You must be she."

"I am," said Mataswintha. "Would that I had never forgotten it!"

And she passed him with a haughty step.

"These Germans, both men and women," said Procopius, as he went out,
"have eyes such as I have never seen before!"



                              CHAPTER XIX.

Meanwhile, Mataswintha had entered her husband's presence unannounced.

Witichis had left untouched all the rooms which had been occupied by
the Amelungs--Theodoric, Athalaric, and Amalaswintha--and had
appropriated to his own use the apartments which he had formerly been
accustomed to inhabit when on duty at court.

He had never assumed the gold and purple trappings of the Amelungs, and
had banished from his chamber all the pomp of royalty.

A low camp-bed, upon which lay his helmet, sword, and various
documents, a long wooden table, and a few wooden chairs and utensils,
formed the simple furniture of the room.

When Procopius had taken leave, the King had thrown himself into a
chair, and, supporting his weary head on his hands, leaned his elbows
upon the table. Thus he had not noticed Mataswintha's light step.

She remained standing near the door, reluctant to advance. She had
never before sought an interview with her husband. Her heart beat fast,
and she could not muster courage to address him.

At last Witichis rose with a sigh, and, turning, saw the motionless
figure at the door.

"Thou here, Queen!" he asked with surprise, as he approached her. "What
can have led thee to me?"

"Duty--compassion--" Mataswintha answered quickly; "otherwise I had
not---- I have a favour to ask of thee."

"It is the first," said Witichis.

"It does not concern me," she added hastily. "I beg for food for some
poor people, who----"

The King silently stretched out his right hand.

It was the first time he had ever offered it. She did not dare to clasp
it, and yet how gladly she would have done so.

Then the King took her hand himself, and pressed it gently.

"I thank thee, Mataswintha, and regret my injustice. I never believed
that thou hadst a heart for thy people. I have thought unkindly of
thee."

"If thy thoughts had been more just from the beginning, perhaps many
things might be better now."

"Scarcely! Misfortune dogs my heels. Just now--thou hast a right to
know it--my last hopes have been destroyed. The Franks, upon whose aid
I depended, have betrayed us. Relief is impossible; the superiority of
the enemy has become too great, by reason of the rebellion of the
Italians. Only one thing remains to me--death!"

"Let me share it with thee," cried Mataswintha, her eyes sparkling.

"Thou? No. The granddaughter of Theodoric will be honourably received
at the Court of Byzantium. It is known that she became my wife against
her will. Thou canst appeal to that fact."

"Never!" exclaimed Mataswintha with enthusiasm.

Witichis, without noticing her, went on:

"But the others! The thousands, the tens of thousands of women and
children! Belisarius will keep his word. There is only one hope for
them, one single hope! For--all the powers of nature are in league
against me. The Padus has suddenly become so shallow, that two hundred
ships with grain, which I had expected, could not be brought down the
river, and fell into the hands of the enemy. I have now written for
assistance to the King of the Ostrogoths; I have asked him to send a
fleet; for ours is lost. If the ships can force their way into the
harbour, then all who cannot fight may take refuge in them. And, if
thou wilt, thou canst fly to Spain."

"I will die with thee--with the others!"

"In a few weeks the Ostrogothic sails may appear off the city. Until
then my magazines will not be exhausted. That is my only comfort. But
that reminds me of thy wish. Here is the key to the great door of the
granaries. I carry it with me day and night. Keep it carefully--it
guards my last hope. Upon its safety depend the lives of many
thousands. These granaries are the only thing that has not failed. I
wonder," he added sadly, "that the earth has not opened, or fire fallen
from Heaven, to destroy this my work!"

He took the heavy key from the bosom of his doublet.

"Guard it well, it is my last treasure, Mataswintha."

"I thank thee, Witichis--King Witichis," said she, and would have taken
the key, but her hand trembled so much that it fell to the ground.

"What is the matter?" asked the King as he picked up the key and put it
into her hand. "Thou tremblest? Art thou sick!" he added anxiously.

"No--it is nothing. But do not look at me so--do not look at me as thou
didst this morning----"

"Forgive me, Queen," said Witichis, turning away, "my looks shall no
more offend thee. I have had much, too much, to grieve me lately. And
when I tried to find out for what hidden guilt I could have deserved
all my misfortune--" his voice grew very tender.

"Then? Oh, speak!" cried Mataswintha; for she could not doubt the
meaning of his unspoken thought.

"I often thought amid all my doubt, that it might be a punishment for
the cruel, cruel wrong I did to a noble creature; a woman whom I have
sacrificed to my people----"

And in the ardour of his speech he involuntarily looked at his
listener.

Mataswintha's cheeks glowed. She was obliged, in order to keep herself
upright, to grasp the arm of the chair near her.

"At last," she thought, "at last his heart awakes, and I--how have I
acted towards him! And he regrets----"

"A woman," continued Witichis, "who has suffered unspeakably on my
account, more than words can express----"

"Cease," whispered Mataswintha so softly that he did not hear it.

"And when I lately saw thee so gentle, so mild, more womanly than ever
before--it touched my heart, and tears came into my eyes!"

"O Witichis!" breathed Mataswintha.

"Every tone of thy voice penetrated deeply into my heart, for the sweet
sound reminded me so vividly, so sadly----"

"Of whom?" asked Mataswintha, and she turned pale as death.

"Of her whom I have sacrificed! Who gave up all for me; of my wife
Rauthgundis, the soul of my soul!"

For how long a time had he never uttered aloud that beloved name! At
the sound of his own voice, grief and longing overcame him, and sinking
into a chair, he buried his face in his hands.

It was well that he did so, for it spared him the sight of the Queen's
sudden start, and the Medusa-like expression which convulsed her
features.

But the sound of a fall made him spring from his seat.

Mataswintha lay upon the ground. Her left hand grasped the broken arm
of the chair near which she had fallen, while her right was pressed
convulsively upon the mosaic floor. Her pale face was bent down; her
splendid golden hair, loosed from its bonds, flowed over her shoulders;
her mobile nostrils quivered.

"Queen!" cried Witichis, bending to lift her up, "what ails thee?"

But before he could touch her, she started up, swift as a serpent, and
stood erect.

"It was only a weakness--which is already over," she panted.
"Farewell!"

She tottered to the door, and, closing it behind her, fell senseless
into Aspa's arms.


During all this time, the mysteriously threatening appearance of the
atmosphere had increased.

The little cloud which Cethegus had remarked the day before, had been
the forerunner of an immense black wall of vapour which had arisen in
the east during the night, and which, since morning, had hovered
gloomily, as if brooding destruction, over the city and the greater
part of the horizon.

In the south, however, the sun shone with an intolerable heat from a
cloudless sky.

The Gothic sentries had doffed their helmets and armour; they preferred
to expose themselves to the arrows of the enemy rather than suffer the
unbearable heat.

There was not a breath of air. The east wind, which had brought up the
wall of cloud, had dropped again.

The sea was grey and motionless; not a leaf of the poplars in the
palace garden moved.

The animal world, silent the day before, was uneasy and terrified. Over
the hot sands on the shore swallows, seagulls, and marsh-birds
fluttered hither and thither, without cause or aim, flying low above
the ground, and often uttering shrill cries.

In the city the dogs ran whining out of the houses; the horses tore
themselves loose from their halters and, snorting impatiently, kicked
and pranced; cats, asses, and mules uttered lamentable cries; and three
of the dromedaries belonging to Belisarius killed themselves in their
frantic efforts to get loose.

Evening was approaching. The sun was about to sink below the horizon.

In the Forum of Hercules a citizen was sitting upon the marble steps of
his house. He was a vine-dresser, and, as the dry branch hung at his
door indicated, himself sold the produce of his vines. He glanced at
the threatening thundercloud.

"I wish it would rain," he sighed. "If it does not rain, it will hail,
and then all the fruit that has not been trampled by the enemy's horses
will be completely destroyed."

"Do you call the troops of our Emperor enemies?" whispered his son, a
Roman patriot. But he said it very softly, for just then a Gothic
patrol turned the corner of the Forum. "I wish Orcus would devour them
all, Greeks and barbarians! The Goths at least are always thirsty. See,
there comes that long Hildebadus; he is one of the thirstiest. I shall
be surprised if he has no desire to drink to-day, when the very stones
are cracking with heat!"

Hildebad had just set the nearest watch. He held his helmet in his left
hand; his lance was carelessly laid across his shoulder.

He passed the wine-house--to the great astonishment of its
owner--turned into the next street, and soon stood before a lofty
massive round tower--it was called the Tower of Ætius.

A handsome young Goth was walking up and down upon the wall in the
shadow of the tower. Long light locks curled upon his shoulders, and
the delicate white and red of his complexion, as well as his mild blue
eyes, gave him almost a girlish aspect.

"Hey! Fridugern," Hildebad called up to him. "Hey! How canst thou bear to
stay up there on that gridiron? With shield and breastplate too!
_Ouff_!"

"I have the watch, Hildebad," answered the youth gently.

"Bother the watch! Dost thou think that Belisarius will attack us in
this blazing heat? I tell you he is glad if he can get air; to-day he
will not thirst for blood. Come with me; I came to fetch thee. The
fat Ravennese in the Forum of Hercules has old wine and young
daughters--let us put both to our lips."

The young Goth shook his long ringlets and frowned.

"I have the watch, and no desire for girls. But thirsty I am,
truly--send me a cup of wine up here."

"Aha! 'tis true, by Freia, Venus, and Maria! Thou hast a bride across
the mountains! And thou thinkest that she will find it out and break
her promise if thou lookest too closely into a pair of black Roman
eyes! Oh, dear friend, how young thou art! No, no; no malice! It is all
right. Thou art nevertheless a very good fellow and wilt get older
by-and-by. I will send thee some old Massikian--then thou canst drink
to Allgunthis all alone."

Hildebad turned back, and soon disappeared into the wine-house.

Presently a slave brought a cup of wine to the young Goth, who
whispered, "Here's to thee, Allgunthis!" and he emptied it at one
draught. Then he took up his lance, and slowly paced to and fro on the
wall.

"I can at least think of her," he said; "no duty can prevent that. When
shall I see her again?"

He walked on, but presently stopped and stood, lost in thought, in the
shadow of the great dark tower, which looked down upon him
threateningly.

In a short time another troop of Goths passed the tower. In their midst
they led a man blindfolded, and let him out at the Porta Honorii.

It was Procopius who had in vain waited for three hours, hoping that
the King would change his mind. It was useless. No messenger came, and
the ambassador left the city ill at ease.

Another hour passed. It had become darker, but not cooler.

Suddenly a strong blast of wind rose from the sea. It drove the black
cloud toward the north with great rapidity. It now hung dense and heavy
over the city. But the sea and the south-eastern horizon were not
thereby rendered clear, for a second and similar wall of cloud closely
followed the first.

The whole sky had now become one black vault.

Hildebad, drowsy with wine, went towards his night-watch at the Porta
Honorii.

"Still at thy post, Fridugern?" he called to the young Goth in passing.
"And still no rain. The poor earth, how thirsty it will be! I pity it!
Goodnight!"

It was insufferably sultry in the houses, for the wind blew from the
scorching deserts of Africa.

The people, alarmed by the threatening appearance of the heavens, came
out of doors, walking in companies through the streets, or sitting in
groups in the courtyards and under the colonnades of the churches.

A crowd of people sat upon the steps of Saint Apollonaris.

And, though the sun had scarcely set, it was already as black as night.

Upon her couch in her bed-chamber lay Mataswintha, the Queen, in a kind
of heavy stupor, her cheeks pale as death. Her wide open eyes stared
into the darkness. She refused to answer Aspa's anxious questions, and
presently dismissed the weeping slave with a motion of her hand.

As she lay thinking, these names passed continuously and monotonously
through her mind: Witichis--Rauthgundis--Mataswintha!
Mataswintha--Rauthgundis--Witichis!

Thus she lay for a long, long time; and it seemed as if nothing could
ever interrupt the unceasing circle of these words.

Suddenly a red light flashed into the room, and at the same moment a
peal of thunder, louder than she had ever before heard, clattered over
the trembling city.

A scream from her women caught her ear, and she started upright on her
couch.

Aspa had divested her of her upper garment; she wore only her
under-dress of white silk. Throwing the falling tresses of her splendid
hair back over her shoulder, she leaned on her elbow and listened.

There was an awful stillness.

Then another flash and another peal.

A rush of wind tore open the window of feldspath which looked into the
court.

Mataswintha stared out at the darkness, which was illuminated at every
moment by a vivid flash of lightning. The thunder rolled incessantly,
overpowering even the fearful howling of the wind.

Mataswintha felt relieved by this strife of the elements. She looked
out eagerly.

Just then Aspa hurried in with a light. It was a torch, the flame of
which was protected from the wind by a glass globe.

"Queen, thou--but, by all the gods! how dost thou look? Like a
Lemure--like the Goddess of Revenge!"

"Would that I were!" said Mataswintha, without taking her eyes from the
window.

They were the first words that she had spoken for hours.

Flash after flash, and peal after peal.

Aspa closed the window.

"O Queen! the Christian maids say that the end of the world has come,
and that the Son of God will come down upon fiery clouds to judge the
living and the dead. Oh! what a flash! And yet there is not a drop of
rain. I have never seen such a storm. The gods are very angry."

"Woe to those with whom they are angry! Oh, I envy the gods! They can
love and hate as they like. They can annihilate those who do not adore
them."

"O mistress! I was in the streets; I have just returned. All the people
stream into the churches, praying and singing. I pray to Kairu and
Astarte. Mistress, dost thou not pray?"

"I curse. That, too, is a kind of prayer."

"Oh, what a peal!" screamed the slave, and fell trembling on her knees.
The dark blue mantle which she wore slid from her shoulders.

The thunder and lightning had now become so violent, that Mataswintha
sprang from her couch and ran to the window.

"Mercy, mercy!" prayed the slave. "Have pity upon us, ye great gods!"

"No, no mercy--a curse upon us miserable mortals! Ha! that was
splendid! Dost thou hear how they scream with fear in the streets?
Another, and yet another! Ha! ye gods--if there be a God or gods--I
envy ye but one thing: the power of your hate and your deadly
lightning. Ye hurl it with all the rage and lust of your hearts, and
your enemies vanish. Then you laugh; the thunder is your laughter. Ha!
what was that!"

A flash and a peal of thunder which outdid all that had gone before.

Aspa started from her knees.

"What is that great building, Aspa? That dark mass opposite? The
lightning must have struck it. Is it on fire?"

"No, thanks to the gods! The lightning only lit it up. It is the
granaries of the King."

"Ha! has your lightning failed?" cried the Queen. "But mortals, too,
can use the lightning of revenge." And she left the window. The room
became suddenly dark.

"Queen--mistress--where art thou? Whither hast thou gone?" cried Aspa.
And she felt along the walls.

But the room was empty, and Aspa called her mistress in vain.

Below in the streets a procession wound its way to the Basilica of
Saint Apollonaris.

Romans and Goths; children and old people; very many women. Boys with
torches walked first; behind came priests with crucifix and banners.

Through the growling of the thunder and the roaring of the wind sounded
the ancient and solemn chorus:

           "Dulce mihi cruciari,
              Parva vis doloris est;
            Malo mori quam f[oe]dari;
              Major vis amoris est."

And the choir answered:

           "Parce, judex, contristatis
              Parce pecatoribus,
            Qui descendis perflammatis
              Ultor jam in nubibus."

And the procession disappeared into the church.

The overseers of the corn-magazines had also joined the crowd of
worshippers.

Upon the steps of the Basilica, exactly opposite the door of the
magazines, sat the woman in the brown mantle, calm and fearless amid
the uproar of the elements; her hands not folded, but resting quietly
on her lap.

The man in the steel cap stood near her.

A Gothic woman, who was just hurrying into the church, recognised her
by the light of a flash of lightning.

"Thou here again, countrywoman? Without shelter? I have offered thee my
house, often enough. Thou appearest strange here in Ravenna?"

"I am so; but still I have a lodging."

"Come into the church and pray with us."

"I pray here."

"But thou neither singest nor speakest."

"Yet still God hears me."

"Pray for the city. They fear that the end of the world is at hand."

"I am not afraid."

"Pray for our good King, who daily gives us bread."

"I do pray for him."

Just then two Gothic patrols came clattering round the corner, and met
opposite the Basilica.

"Aye, thunder till the skies crack!" scolded the leader of one of the
bands; "but do not hinder me in my duty. Halt! Wisand, is it thou?
Where is the King? In the church also?"

"No, Hildebad; upon the walls."

"That is right; that is his place. Forwards! Long live the King!"

Their steps died away.

A Roman tutor, with some of his pupils, passed by.

"But, magister," said the youngest boy, "I thought you were going to
the church? Why do you take us out in this storm?"

"I only spoke of church to get you out of the house. Church! I tell
you, the fewer roofs and walls about one the better. I am going to take
you out into the great meadow in the suburbs. I wish it would rain. If
Vesuvius were near, as it is in my native place, I should think that
Ravenna was about to become a second Herculaneum. I know such an
atmosphere as we have to-day--it is dangerous."

And they went on.

"Wilt thou not come with me, mistress?" the man in the steel cap asked
the Gothic woman. "I must try to find Dromon, else we shall get no
lodging tonight. I cannot leave thee alone in the dark. Thou hast no
light with thee."

"Dost thou not see that the lightning never ceases? Go; I will come
afterwards. I have still something to think of--and to pray for."

And the woman remained alone.

She pressed both hands against her bosom and looked up at the black
sky; her lips moved slightly.

Just then it seemed to her as if, in the high outer galleries,
passages, and upper rooms of the mighty wooden edifice which towered in
a dark mass opposite, a light came and went, wandering up and down. She
thought it must have been a deception caused by the lightning, for any
open light would have been extinguished by the wind. But no; it really
was a light, for its appearance and disappearance alternated at regular
intervals, as if the person carrying it were hurrying along the
galleries and passing behind the pillars and supports.

The woman attentively watched the changing light and shadow---- But
suddenly--oh, horror!--she started up.

It seemed to her as if the marble step upon which she was sitting had
been some sleeping animal, which, suddenly awaking, moved slightly,
then rose--and turned itself--violently--from left to right.

Thunder, lightning, and wind ceased all at once.

There! from the granaries sounded a shrill scream. The light flamed up
brightly, and then disappeared.

But the woman in the street also uttered a low cry of fear, for now she
could no longer doubt--the earth quaked under her.

A slight movement; then two, three strong shocks, as if the ground had
heaved from left to right like a wave.

Screams of fear rose from the city.

The people rushed out of the doors of the Basilica.

Another shock!

The woman kept her feet with difficulty.

And, from the farther side of the city, sounded a dull and distant
crash, as if of heavy falling masses.

A fearful earthquake had shaken all Ravenna.



                              CHAPTER XX.

As the woman turned in the direction of the sound, she stood for a
moment with her back to the granaries. But she suddenly looked round,
for she thought she heard the bang of a heavy door. She looked
attentively in that direction, but it was too dark to see anything. She
heard, however, something rustling along close to the outer wall of the
building, and she thought she caught the sound of a low sigh.

"Stop!" she cried, "who moans there?"

"Peace, peace!" whispered a strange voice. "The earth--disgusted--shook
and trembled! The last day has come--it will reveal all. He will soon
know.--Oh!"

A groan of pain--a rustle of garments--then complete silence.

"Where art thou? Art thou wounded?" asked the woman, seeking on the
ground.

A flash of lightning--the first since the earthquake--showed her a
shrouded form lying at her feet. A woman dressed in white and blue.

The Gothic woman stretched out her hand, but the prostrate form sprang
up at her touch, and, with a scream, disappeared into the darkness.

All this had passed rapidly, and seemed like some frightful dream, but
a broad gold bracelet, ornamented with a green serpent in emeralds,
remained in the Gothic woman's hand, a proof of the reality of the
mysterious vision.

And again the iron steps of the Gothic patrol approached.

"Hildebad, Hildebad, help!" cried Wisand.

"I am here! What is the matter? Where shall I go?" asked Hildebad,
advancing with his men.

"To the Gate of Honorius! The wall has fallen, and the tower of Ætius
lies in ruins. Help! Into the breach!"

"I come! Poor, poor Fridugern!"

Outside, in the camp of the Byzantines, Cethegus the Prefect rushed
into Belisarius's tent.

He was in full armour, his plume of crimson horsehair tossed upon his
helm. His bearing was proud. His eyes flashed.

"Up! Why do you linger, Belisarius? The walls of your enemy's citadel
fall of themselves! The last refuge of the last King of the Goths lies
open before you! Why do you remain in your tent?"

"I adore the Almighty," said Belisarius with composure. Antonina stood
near him, her arm about his neck.

A praying-stool and a tall crucifix showed in what occupation the
stormy entrance of the Prefect had disturbed them.

"Do that to-morrow, after the victory. But now, storm the city!"

"Storm the city now?" cried Antonina. "What sacrilege! The earth is
shaken to its foundations, for God the Lord speaks in this elemental
strife!"

"Let Him speak! We will act. Belisarius, the tower of Ætius and a
portion of the walls have fallen. I ask you, will you not storm the
city?"

"He is not wrong," said Belisarius, in whom the lust of battle was
awakening. "But it is a dark night----"

"To victory and the heart of Ravenna I will find my way even in the
dark. And it lightens besides."

"You are all at once very eager for the fight," said Belisarius
hesitatingly.

"Yes, for there is good reason. The barbarians are startled. They fear
God and forget their enemies."

At this moment Procopius and Marcus Licinius hurried into the tent
together.

"Belisarius," cried the first, "the earthquake has thrown down the
barracks by the northern trench, and has buried half a cohort of your
Illyrians!"

"My poor people!" cried Belisarius, and at once left the tent.

"Cethegus," said Marcus, "one of your cohorts also lies buried under
their barracks."

But, impatiently shaking his head, the Prefect asked: "How is the water
in the Gothic moat before the tower of Ætius? Has not the earthquake
lessened it?"

"Yes, the water has disappeared--the moat is quite dry. Hark, what a
cry! It is your Illyrians! They cry for help!"

"Let them cry!" said Cethegus. "Is the moat really dry? Then give the
signal to storm. Follow me with all the Isaurians that are still
alive."

And in the midst of thunder and lightning, which now again raged
unceasingly, the Prefect hurried to the trenches where his Roman
legions and the rest of the Isaurians stood under arms. He quickly
counted them. There were far too few to take the city alone, but he
knew that a moderate success would immediately cause Belisarius to join
him.

"Lights! torches!" he cried, and stepped to the front of his Roman
legions with a torch in his left hand. "Forward!" he cried. "Draw your
swords!"

But not a hand was raised.

Dumb with astonishment and terror, the whole troop--even the leaders,
even Licinius--looked at the demonic man, who, in the midst of all
Nature's rebellion, thought only of his goal, and of using the strife
of the elements and the terrors of the Almighty as means to prosecute
his own ends.

"Well? which is your duty? To listen to the thunder, or to me!" he
cried.

"General," said a centurion, stepping forward, "the men pray; for the
earth quaked."

"Do you think that Italy will devour her own children? No, Romans; see!
The very earth quakes at the tread of the barbarians. It rises, breaks
its bonds, and their walls fall. Roma, Roma æterna!"

His words took effect.

It was one of those Cæsarian speeches which move men to great deeds.

"Roma, Roma æterna!" cried, first Licinius, and after him thousands of
Roman youths; and through night and storm, through thunder and
lightning, they followed the Prefect, whose grand enthusiasm
irresistibly carried them away.

Excitement lent wings to their feet. They were soon across the wide
moat which usually they scarcely dared to approach.

Cethegus was the first to reach the opposite side.

The wind had extinguished the torches.

But he found his way in the dark.

"Here, Licinius!" he cried, "follow me! Here must be the breach."

He sprang forward, but ran against some hard body and staggered back.

"What is that!" asked Lucius Licinius behind him. "A second wall?"

"No," said a quiet voice, "but a Gothic shield!"

"That is King Witichis!" said the Prefect furiously, and with bitter
hatred he looked at the dark figure before him.

He had counted upon a surprise. His hope was frustrated.

"If I but had him," he said to himself, "he should never hinder me
again!"

Looking behind, he now saw many torch-lights and heard the flourish of
trumpets. Belisarius was leading his troops to storm the walls.

Procopius reached the Prefect.

"Well, why do you stop? Do new walls keep you back?"

"Yes, living walls. There they stand," and the Prefect pointed forward
with his sword.

"Under the still tottering ruins, these Goths! Truly," cried
Procopius--

          "'Si fractus illabatur orbis,
            Impavidos ferient ruinæ!'

They are courageous men!"

But now Belisarius was at hand with his compact lines, ready for the
assault.

One moment more--the leaders were still hurrying to and fro, giving
orders--and a terrible slaughter would begin.

But suddenly all the sky above the city was flooded with a red light.

A column of flame shot up into the air, and countless sparks descended.
It seemed to rain fire from heaven. All Ravenna glowed in the crimson
light. It was a fearful but beautiful spectacle.

Both armies, ready to mingle in a hand-to-hand combat, halted and
hesitated.

"Fire! fire! Witichis, King Witichis!" shouted a horseman, who came
galloping from the city; "it burns!"

"We see it. Let it burn, Markja! First fight and then extinguish."

"No, no, sire; all the granaries burn! The grain flies in myriads of
sparks through the air."

"The granaries are burning!" cried Goths and Byzantines.

Witichis had no heart to ask questions.

"The lightning must have kindled the interior long ago. It is quite
burnt out. Look! look!"

A stronger gust of wind fanned the fire, which flamed up higher than
ever. The flames caught the nearest roofs, and, at the same time, the
wooden ridge of the lofty building seemed to fall, for, after a heavy
crash, the sparks shot up thicker than ever.

It was a sea of fire.

Witichis tried to lift his hand to give an order--but his arm fell,
faint and powerless. Cethegus saw it.

"Now!" he cried; "now let us assault!"

"No; halt!" thundered Belisarius. "He who lifts his sword is the
Emperor's enemy and dies! Back to the camp--all. Now Ravenna is mine!
To-morrow it will fall without a struggle."

His troops obeyed him and drew back.

Cethegus was in a fury. He alone was too weak to oppose the order. He
was obliged to yield.

His plans were ruined. He had wished to take the city by storm in
order--as he had done in Rome--to take possession of its principal
defences. And he foresaw that it would be now delivered completely into
the hand of Belisarius. He led his troops away in disgust.

But the events which actually occurred afterwards, were very different
to what either the Prefect or Belisarius had expected.



                              CHAPTER XXI.

The King had left the breach in the wall and the Tower of Ætius to the
care of Hildebad, and hurried at once to the place of the
conflagration.

When he arrived he found the fire dying out--but merely for want of
more combustibles.

The whole contents of the magazines, together with the wooden walls and
roofs, and everything that could burn, had been destroyed; not a
remnant of corn nor a splinter of wood was left. The naked smoke and
soot-blackened stone walls of the marble Circus alone still rose into
the sky. Not a sign of its having been struck by lightning could be
seen. The fire must have glimmered for some time after the lightning
had kindled the woodwork, and spread slowly and unseen through the
interior of the building; and when smoke and flame had burst through
the apertures in the roof, it was too late to save the structure. The
inhabitants had enough to do to save the neighbouring houses, of which
many had already caught fire in various places.

The rain, which began to fall shortly before daybreak, came to their
assistance. The wind, thunder and lightning had ceased; but when the
sun broke through the clouds it only illumined, instead of the
granaries, a miserable heap of rubbish and ashes in the middle of the
marble Circus.

The King leaned against one of the pillars of the Basilica, sadly and
silently looking at the ruins.

For a long time he stood motionless, only sometimes he drew his mantle
more closely over his heaving chest.

A painful resolution was ripening in his soul, which seemed to have
become as still as the grave.

But round about him the place was full of the misery of the poor people
of Ravenna, who prayed, scolded, wept and cursed.

"Oh! what will now become of us?"--"Oh, how sweet and good and white
was the bread which we received but yesterday!"--"What shall we eat
now?"--"Bah, the King must help us."--"Yes, the King must give us
bread."--"The King? Ah, the poor man! where will he get it?"--"He has
no more."--"That's another thing!"--"He alone has brought us to this
pass!"--"It is his fault!"--"Why did he not surrender the city to the
Emperor long ago?"--"Yes, to its rightful master!"--"Curses on the
barbarians! It is all their fault!"--"No, no, it is only the
King's fault!"--"Do you not understand? It is a punishment from
God!"--"Punishment? Why? What wrong has he done? Has he not given bread
to the people?"--"Then you do not know? How can a bigamist deserve the
grace of God? The wicked man has two wives. He lusted for the beauty of
Mataswintha, and did not rest until she became his. He put away his
lawful wife."

Witichis indignantly descended the steps.

He was disgusted with the people.

But they recognised him.

"There is the King! How gloomy he looks!" they called to each other,
avoiding him.

"Oh, I don't fear him! I fear hunger more than his anger. Give us
bread. King Witichis! Do you hear? We are starving!" cried a ragged old
man, catching at the King's mantle.

"Bread, King!"

"Good King, bread!"

"We are in despair!"

"Help us!"

And the crowd gathered round him with wild gestures.

Quietly but decisively the King freed himself.

"Have patience," he said gravely; "before the sun sets you shall have
bread."

And he hurried to his room.

There a Roman physician and some of Mataswintha's attendants awaited
him.

"Sire," said the physician, "the Queen, your wife, is very sick. The
terrors of last night have disturbed her mind. She speaks as if in
delirium. Will you not see her?"

"Not now. Have a care of her."

"With an air of great distress and anxiety she gave me this key," added
the physician. "It appeared to be the principal subject of her
wandering speeches. She took it from under her pillow, and she made me
swear to give it into your own hands, as it was of great importance."

With a bitter smile the King took the key and threw it on one side.

"It is no longer of importance. Go; leave me: and send my secretary."

An hour later, Procopius admitted Cethegus into the tent of the
commander-in-chief.

As he entered, Belisarius, who was pacing to and fro with hasty steps,
cried out:

"This comes of your plans, Prefect--of your arts and lies! I always
said that lies are the source of ruin. I do not understand such ways!
Oh, why did I follow your advice? Now I am in great straits!"

"What mean these virtuous speeches?" Cethegus asked Procopius.

The latter handed him a letter.

"Bead. These barbarians are unfathomable in their grand simplicity.
They conquer the devil by virtue of their childlike minds. Read."

And Cethegus read with amazement:


"'Yesterday thou didst acquaint me with three things: that the Franks
had betrayed me; that thou, allied with them, wilt wrest the West from
the ungrateful Emperor; and that thou offerest the Goths a free
departure, unarmed, over the Alps. Yesterday I answered that the Goths
would never give up their arms, nor Italy, the conquest and inheritance
of their great King, and that I would rather fall here with my whole
army than do so. This I answered yesterday. I say so still, although
earth, air, fire, and water are allied against me. But last night, as I
watched the flames which were devouring my stores, I felt sure of what
I have long dimly suspected. That a curse lies upon me. For my sake the
Goths perish. This shall go on no longer. The crown upon my head has
hitherto prevented me from taking an honourable course; it shall
prevent me no longer. Thou art right to rebel against the false and
ungrateful Justinian! He is our enemy and thine. Well then--instead of
placing thy confidence in an army of faithless Franks, place it in the
whole Gothic nation, whose strength and fidelity are known to thee!
With the first thou wouldst share Italy; with us thou canst keep it
all. Let me be the first to greet thee as Emperor of the West and King
of the Goths. All the rights of my people remain untouched; thou simply
takest my place. I myself will set my crown upon thy head, and verily,
no Justinian shall then tear it from thee! If thou rejectest this
offer, prepare for such a battle as thou hast never yet fought. I will
break into thy camp with fifty thousand Goths. We shall fall, but with
us thy whole army. The one and the other. I have sworn it. Choose.

                                                     "'WITICHIS.'"

For one moment the Prefect was terribly alarmed. He cast a swift and
searching look at Belisarius.

But a single glance sufficed to set him at ease.

"It is Belisarius," he said to himself, "but it is always dangerous to
play with the devil. What A temptation!"

He returned the letter, and said with a smile: "What an idea! To what
strange things can desperation lead!"

"The idea would not be bad," observed Procopius, "if----"

"If Belisarius were not Belisarius," said Cethegus, smiling.

"Spare your smiles," said Belisarius. "I admire the man, and I cannot
take it amiss that he thinks I am capable of revolt. Have I not
pretended to be so?" and he stamped his foot. "Now advise and help me!
You have led me to this miserable alternative. I cannot say yes; and if
I say no--I may look upon the Emperor's army as annihilated, and, into
the bargain, must confess that I pretended to revolt!"

Cethegus reflected in silence, slowly stroking his chin with his left
hand. Suddenly a thought seemed to flash across his mind. A ray of joy
beautified his face.

"In this way I can ruin them both," he said to himself.

At this moment he was exceedingly contented with himself.

But first he wished to make sure of Belisarius.

"Reasonably, you can only do one of two things," he said hesitatingly.

"Speak: I see neither the one nor the other."

"Either really accept----"

"Prefect!" cried Belisarius in a rage, and put his hand on his sword.
Procopius caught his arm in alarm. "Not another such word, Cethegus, if
you value your life!"

"Or," continued Cethegus quietly, "seem to accept. Enter Ravenna
without a stroke of the sword, and send the Gothic crown, together with
the Gothic King, to Byzantium."

"That is splendid!" cried Procopius.

"It is treason!" cried Belisarius.

"It is both," said Cethegus calmly.

"I could never look a Goth in the face again!"

"It will not be necessary. You will take the King a prisoner to
Byzantium. The disarmed nation will cease to be a nation."

"No, no, I will not do it."

"Good. Then let your whole army make its will. Farewell, Belisarius. I
go to Rome. I have not the least desire to see fifty thousand Goths
fighting in despair. And how Emperor Justinian will praise the
destroyer of his best army!"

"It is a terrible alternative!" cried Belisarius.

Cethegus slowly approached him.

"Belisarius," he said, with a voice which seemed to come from his very
heart, "you have often held me to be your enemy. And I am, in some
sort, your adversary. But who can be near Belisarius in the field of
battle and not admire him!" His manner had a suavity and solemnity
seldom seen in the sarcastic Prefect. Belisarius was touched, and even
Procopius wondered. "I am your friend whenever possible. In this case I
will prove my friendship by giving you good advice. Do you believe me,
Belisarius?"

And he laid his left hand upon the heroes shoulder, and offered him his
right, looking frankly into his eyes.

"Yes," said Belisarius. "Who can mistrust such a look!"

"See, Belisarius! Never has a noble man had such a distrustful master
as yours. The Emperor's last letter is the greatest offence to your
fidelity."

"Heaven knows it!"

"And never has a man"--here he took both the hands of Belisarius--"had
a more splendid opportunity to put ignoble mistrust to shame, to
revenge himself gloriously, and to prove his fidelity. You are accused
of aspiring to the Empire of the West! By God, you have it in your
power! Enter Ravenna--let Goths and Italians do you homage and place a
double crown upon your head. Ravenna yours, with your blindly devoted
army, the Goths and Italians--truly you are unassailable. Justinian
will tremble before Belisarius, and his haughty Narses will be but a
straw against your strength. But you--who have all this in your
hand--you will lay all the glory and the power at your master's feet
and say: 'Behold, Justinian, Belisarius would rather be your servant,
than ruler of the Western Empire.' So gloriously, Belisarius, has
fidelity never yet been proved upon earth."

Cethegus had hit the mark. The general's eyes flashed.

"You are right, Cethegus. Come to my heart. I thank you. It is nobly
thought. O Justinian, you shall blush with shame!"

Cethegus withdrew from the embrace, and went to the door.

"Poor Witichis," whispered Procopius, as he passed; "he is sacrificed
to this masterpiece of truth! Now he is indeed lost."

"Yes," said Cethegus, "he is lost most surely."

Outside the tent he added, as he threw his mantle over his shoulder:

"But you, Belisarius, more surely still!"


Arrived at his quarters, he found Lucius Licinius in full armour.

"Well, general!" asked Lucius. "The city has not yet surrendered. When
shall we fight?"

"The war is over, my Lucius. Doff your arms and gird yourself for a
journey. This very day you must carry some private letters for me."

"To whom?"

"To the Emperor and Empress."

"In Byzantium?"

"No. Fortunately they are quite near, at the Baths of Epidaurus.
Hasten! In fifteen days you must be back again. Not half a day later.
The fate of Italy awaits your return."

As soon as Procopius brought the answer of Belisarius to the Gothic
King, the latter summoned to his palace the leaders of the army, the
principal Goths, and a number of trustworthy freemen, and communicated
to them what had happened, demanding their acquiescence.

At first they were exceedingly surprised, and complete silence followed
his words.

At last Duke Guntharis, looking at the King with emotion, said:

"The last of thy royal deeds, Witichis, is as noble, yea, nobler than
all thy former acts. I shall ever regret having once opposed thee.
Long since I swore in my heart to atone by blindly obeying thee. And
truly--in this case thou alone canst decide; for thy sacrifice is the
greatest--a crown! But if another than thou shalt be King--the
Wölfung's can better endure to serve a stranger, a Belisarius, than
some other Goth. So I agree to what thou sayest, and tell thee that
thou hast acted well and nobly."

"And I say no! a thousand times no!" cried Hildebad. "Think what you
do. A stranger at the head of the Goths!"

"Have not other Germans done the same before us--Quadians; Herulians,
and Markomannians?" said Witichis calmly. "Even our most glorious
Kings--even Theodoric? They served the Emperor and received land in
exchange. So runs the treaty with Emperor Zeno, by which Theodoric took
possession of Italy. I do not count Belisarius less than Zeno, and
myself, truly, not better than Theodoric!"

"Yes, if it were Justinian," interposed Guntharis.

"Never would I submit to the false and cowardly tyrant!" cried
Hildebad.

"But Belisarius is a hero--canst thou deny it? Hast thou forgotten how
he thrust thee off thy horse?"

"May the thunder strike me if I forget it! It is the only thing in him
which has ever pleased me."

"And fortune is with him, as misfortune is with me. We shall be as free
as before, and only fight his battles against Byzantium. We shall be
revenged on our common enemy."

Almost all those present now agreed with the King.

"Well, I cannot contradict you in words," said Hildebad; "my tongue has
ever been more clumsy than my sword. But I feel sure that you are
wrong. Had we but the Black Earl here, he would say what I can only
feel. May you never regret this step! But permit me to quit this
monstrous kingdom. I will never live under Belisarius. I will go in
search of adventures. With a shield and spear and a strong hand, a man
can go a great way."

Witichis hoped to change the intention of his trusty comrade in private
conversation. At present he continued to carry forward that which he
had at heart.

"You must know," he said, "that first of all Belisarius has made it a
condition that nothing should be published until he has occupied
Ravenna. It is to be feared that some of his leaders, with their
troops, will hear nothing of a rebellion against Belisarius. These, as
well as the suspicious quarters of Ravenna, must be surrounded by the
Goths and the trustworthy adherents of Belisarius before all is made
known."

"Take care," said Hildebad, "that you yourselves do not fall into a
trap! We Goths should not try to spin such spiders' toils. It is as if
a bear should try to dance on a rope--he would fall, sooner or later.
Farewell--and may this business turn out better than I expect. I go to
take leave of my brother. He, if I know him, will soon reconcile
himself to this Roman-Gothic State. But Black Teja, I think, will go
away with me."

In the evening a report ran through the city that terms of capitulation
had been made and accepted. The conditions were unknown. But it was
certain that Belisarius, at the desire of the King, had sent large
stores of bread, meat, and wine into Ravenna, which were distributed
amongst the poor.

"He has kept his word!" cried the people; and blessed the name of the
King.

Witichis now asked after the health of the Queen, and learned that she
was gradually recovering.

"Patience," he said, taking a deep breath; "she also will soon be at
liberty, and rid of me!"

It was already growing dark, when a strong company of mounted Goths
made their way through the city to the breach at the Tower of Ætius.

A tall horseman went first. Then came a group, carrying a heavy burden,
hidden by cloths and mantles, upon their crossed lances. Then the rest
of the men in full armour.

"Unbolt the gate!" cried the leader; "we want to go out."

"Is it thou, Hildebad?" asked Earl Wisand, who commanded the watch, and
he gave the order to open the gate. "Dost thou know that to-morrow the
city will surrender? Whither wilt thou go?"

"To freedom!" cried Hildebad; and spurred his horse forward.



                             CHAPTER XXII.

Many days passed before Mataswintha fully recovered from the delirium
of fever and the uneasy slumbers, haunted by terrible dreams, which
followed.

She had become dull and impassive to all that passed around her, taking
no interest in the great changes which were in preparation. She
appeared to have no other feeling than that of the enormity of her
crime. The triumphal exultation which she had felt while rushing
through the night with her torch, had given place to devouring remorse,
horror, and dread.

At the moment of committing the wicked deed, the earthquake had thrown
her upon her knees, and in her excitement, in the pang of awakening
conscience, she thought that the very earth was rising up against her,
and that the judgment of Heaven was about to fall upon her guilty head.

And when, on reaching her chamber, she presently saw the flames, which
her own hand had kindled, reddening all the sky; when she heard the
cries and lamentations of Ravennese and Goths; the flames seemed to
scorch her heart and every cry to call down curses upon her.

She lost her senses; she was overwhelmed by the consequences of her
deed.

When she came to herself and gradually recollected all that had passed,
her hatred of the King was completely spent. Her soul was bowed down;
she was filled with deep remorse; and a terrible fear of ever having to
appear before him again came upon her, for she well knew, and now heard
from all sides, that the destruction of the magazines would oblige the
King to surrender to his enemies.

Himself she did not see. Even when he found a moment in which to ask
personally after her health, she had conjured the astonished Aspa on no
account to let him approach her, although she had left her couch many
days ago, and had frequently admitted the poor of the city; had,
indeed, invited the sufferers to apply to her for help.

At such times she had given the provisions intended for herself and her
attendants to the poor with her own hands, and divided amongst them her
jewels and gold with unlimited generosity.

It was one of these visits that she was expecting, after having been
petitioned by a man in a brown mantle and steel cap to grant a private
audience to a poor woman of her nation. "She has a message which
concerns the King. She has to warn you of some treachery which
threatens his crown and perhaps his life," the man had said.

Mataswintha at once granted his request.

Even if it were a mistake, an excuse, she could now never more refuse
to admit any one who came with a message concerning the King's safety.
She ordered the woman to come at sunset.

The sun had gone down.

In the south there is almost no twilight, and it was nearly dark when a
slave beckoned to the woman, who had been waiting in the court for some
time, to come forward.

The Queen, sick and sleepless during the night, had only fallen asleep
at the eighth hour. She had just awoke, and was very weak.
Notwithstanding, she would receive the woman, because she said her
message concerned the King.

"But is that really true?" inquired the slave----it was Aspa. "I should
not like to disturb my mistress without cause. If you only want gold,
say so freely; you shall have as much as you wish--only spare my
mistress. Does it really concern the King?"

"It does."

With a sigh, Aspa led the woman into the Queen's chamber.

The form of Mataswintha, clad in light white garments, her head and
hair covered by a folded kerchief, was relieved against the dark
background of the spacious chamber, lying upon a couch, near which
stood a round table in mosaic. The golden lamp, which was fixed to the
wall above the table, shed a faint light.

Mataswintha rose and seated herself, with an air of fatigue, upon the
edge of her couch.

"Draw near," she said to the woman. "Thy message concerns the King? Why
dost thou hesitate? Speak!"

The woman pointed at Aspa.

"She is silent and faithful."

"She is a woman."

At a sign from the Queen, the slave reluctantly left the room.

"Daughter of the Amelungs, I know that nothing but the strait in which
the kingdom stood, and not love, led thee to Witichis.--(How lovely she
is, although pale as death!)--Yet thou art the Queen of the Goths--his
Queen--and even if thou dost not love him, his kingdom, his triumph,
must be all in all to thee."

Mataswintha grasped the gilded arm of her couch.

"So thinks every beggar in the nation!" she sighed.

"To the King I cannot speak, for special reasons," continued the woman.
"Therefore I speak to thee whose province it is to succour and warn him
against treason. Listen to me." And she drew nearer, looking keenly at
the Queen.--"How strange," she said to herself; "what similarity of
form!"

"Treason! still more treason?"

"So thou too suspectest treason?"

"It is no matter. From whom? From Byzantium? From without? From the
Prefect?"

"No," the woman answered, shaking her head. "Not from without; from
within. Not from a man; from a woman."

"What dost thou say?" asked Mataswintha, turning still paler. "How can
a woman----"

"Injure the hero? In the devilish wickedness of her heart. Not openly,
but by cunning and treachery; perhaps with secret poison, as has
already happened; perhaps with secret fire."

"Hold!"

Mataswintha, who had just risen, staggered back to the table and leaned
upon it. But the woman followed her and whispered softly:

"I must tell thee of an incredible, shameful act! The King and the
people believe that the lightning set the magazines on fire, but I know
better. And _he_ shall know it. He shall be warned by _thee_, so that
he may discover the rank offender. That night I saw a torch-light
passing through the galleries of the magazines, and it was carried by a
woman. _Her_ hand cast it amongst the stores! Thou shudderest? Yes, a
_woman_. Wherefore wilt thou go? Hear one other word, and I will leave
thee. The name? I do not know it. But the woman fell just at my feet,
and, recovering, escaped; but as she went, she lost a sign and means of
recognition--this snake of emeralds."

And the woman held up a bracelet in the light of the lamp.

Mataswintha, tortured to death, started upright. She held both arms
over her face. The hasty movement disturbed her kerchief. Her red-gold
hair fell over her shoulders, and through the hair gleamed a golden
bracelet with an emerald snake, which encircled her left arm.

The woman saw it and screamed:

"Ha! by the God of the faithful! It was thou--thou thyself! _His_
Queen--his _wife_ has betrayed him! He shall know it! Curses upon
thee!"

With a piercing cry, Mataswintha fell back upon her couch and buried
her face in the cushions.

The scream brought Aspa from the adjoining room. But when she entered,
the Queen was alone.

The curtain of the door still rustled. The beggar had disappeared.



                             CHAPTER XXIII.

The next morning Procopius, Johannes, Demetrius, Bessas, Acacius,
Vitalius, and many other Byzantine leaders arrived in the city, and, to
the great astonishment of the Ravennese, entered the King's palace.

They assembled there to take counsel as to particular stipulations, and
to decide upon the form of surrender.

Meanwhile the Goths heard only that peace was concluded. The two
principal considerations, for the sake of which they had endured all
the grievous war, were obtained. They would be free, and remain in
undisturbed possession of the lovely Southland, which had become so
dear to them. That was far more than could have been expected,
considering the desperate state at which the Gothic cause had arrived
since the retreat from Rome and the inevitable loss of Ravenna; and the
heads of the great families, and other influential men in the army, who
were now made acquainted with the intentions of Belisarius, were
completely satisfied with the conditions agreed upon.

The few who refused acquiescence were freely allowed to depart from
Ravenna and Italy.

But, apart from this, the Gothic army in Ravenna had already been
dispersed in all directions.

Witichis saw that it was impossible to feed the Gothic army and the
population, as well as the hosts of Belisarius, from the produce of the
exhausted land; he therefore agreed to the proposal of Belisarius, that
the Goths, in companies of a hundred or a thousand, should be led out
of the gates of the city and dismissed in all directions to their
native places.

Belisarius feared the outbreak of despair when the terrible treachery
practised should become known, and he therefore wished for the speedy
dispersal of the disbanded army. Once in Ravenna, he hoped to be able
to quell any possible rebellion in the open country without difficulty.

Tarvisium, Verona, and Ticinum, the last strongholds of the Goths in
Italy, could not then, for any length of time, resist the forces which
would be sent against them.

The execution of these measures was the work of many days. Only when
very few Goths were left in Ravenna did Belisarius decide upon entering
the city. And even of the few who remained, half were transferred to
the Byzantine camp, the other half being divided amongst the different
quarters of the city, under the pretext of being ready to crush any
possible resistance on the part of Justinian's adherents.

But what surprised the Ravennese and the uninitiated Goths the most
was, that the blue Gothic flag still waved upon the roof of the palace.
Certainly it was guarded by a Byzantine instead of by a Gothic
sentinel. For the palace was already full of Byzantines.

Belisarius had taken particular measures against any attempt of the
Prefect to make himself master of the city, as he had done of Rome.

Cethegus saw through this and smiled. He did nothing to prevent it.

On the morning of the day appointed for the entrance, Cethegus entered
the tent of Belisarius, clad in a magnificent suit of armour. He found
only Procopius.

"Are you ready!" he asked.

"Perfectly."

"At what time shall it take place?"

"At the moment when the King mounts his horse in the courtyard of the
palace in order to ride to meet Belisarius. We have thought of
everything."

"Once more of everything!" said Cethegus, with a laugh. "Yet one thing
you have left to me. It is certain that as soon as our plan has
succeeded and become known, that the barbarians all over the country
will fly into a rage. Revenge and compassion for their King may cause
them to commit furious deeds. But all their enthusiasm for Witichis and
anger against us would be nipped in the bud; they would consider
themselves betrayed by their King, and not by us, if we could get him
to sign a document to the purport that he did not surrender the city to
Belisarius as the King of the Goths and a rebel against the Emperor,
but simply to Justinian's commander-in-chief. Then the revolt of
Belisarius, which will actually not take place, would seem to the Goths
to have been a mere lie invented by their King in order to hide from
them the shame of the surrender."

"That would be excellent; but Witichis will not do it."

"_Knowingly_, scarcely; but perhaps unknowingly. He has only signed the
treaty in the original yet?"

"He has signed only once."

"And the document is in his possession? Good. I will make him sign the
duplicate which I have drawn up, so that Belisarius also may possess
the valuable document."

Procopius looked at it.

"If he sign this, then, indeed, not a Goth will raise his sword in his
defence. But----"

"Let me manage the 'buts.' Either he will voluntarily sign it to-day,
unread, under pressure of the moment----"

"Or?"

"Or," concluded Cethegus gloomily, "he will sign it later, against his
will. I will now go before you. Excuse me if I do not assist at your
triumphal procession. Many congratulations to Belisarius."

But as he turned to go, Belisarius himself entered the tent, unarmed,
and looking very sullen. He was followed by Antonina.

"Hasten, general," cried Procopius, "Ravenna waits for her conqueror.
The entrance----"

"Speak not of it!" cried Belisarius angrily. "I regret the whole
affair! Recall the soldiers!"

Cethegus remained standing at the entrance of the tent.

"Belisarius!" cried Procopius, horrified, "what demon has put you into
this temper?"

"I!" said Antonina proudly. "What do you say now?"

"I say that great statesmen have no business with wives," cried
Procopius angrily.

"Belisarius told me your intentions only last night," said Antonina,
"and with tears----"

"Of course!" grumbled Procopius. "Tears always come when wanted."

"With tears I prayed him to refrain. I cannot bear to see my hero so
spotted with black treachery."

"And I will not be so," said Belisarius. "Rather would I ride into
Orcus a prisoner, than as _such_ a conqueror into Ravenna! My letters
to the Emperor have not yet been sent away--so there is still time----"

"No!" cried Cethegus imperiously, coming forward from the doorway,
"fortunately for you there is _not_ still time. I wrote to the Emperor
eight days ago, told him all, and congratulated him on his general's
having won Ravenna and put an end to the war without the slightest
loss."

"Indeed, Prefect!" cried Belisarius. "You are very ready! Wherefore
this zeal?"

"Because I know Belisarius and his wavering mind. Because you must be
_forced_ into taking advantage of your good fortune, and because I wish
to make an end to this war which so cruelly devastates my Italy!"

And he approached Antonina threateningly, who again could not avoid the
demonic fascination of his glance.

"Dare it! try it now! Dare to retreat, to undeceive Witichis, and
sacrifice Ravenna, Italy, and your whole army to a whim of your wife!
Then see if Justinian would ever forgive you! On Antonina's soul the
guilt! Hark! the trumpets sound! Arm yourself! There is no choice!"

And he hurried out.

Antonina looked after him in dismay.

"Procopius," she asked, "does the Emperor really know it already?"

"Even if he did not, too many are initiated into our secret. In all
cases he would learn afterwards that Ravenna and Italy were his,
and--that Belisarius strove for the Gothic and the imperial crown.
Nothing can justify Belisarius in the Emperor's eyes, except the fact
of gaining Ravenna, and delivering it to Justinian."

"Yes," said Belisarius, sighing, "he is right. I have no choice left."

"Then go!" said Antonina, intimidated. "But excuse me from accompanying
you. It is no triumph, but a laying of a trap."


The population of Ravenna, although in the dark as to the particular
conditions, were still certain that peace was concluded, and the long
and terrible suffering they had endured at an end. In their joy at this
deliverance, the citizens had cleared away the ruins caused by the
earthquake in many of the streets, and had festively decorated the
city.

Wreaths, flags, and carpets were hung out; the people crowded the
forums, the canals of the lagoons, and the baths and basilicas, curious
to see the hero, Belisarius, and the army which had so long threatened
their walls, and had, at last, overcome the barbarians.

Already some divisions of the Byzantine army marched proudly through
the gates, while the scattered and scanty Gothic patrols beheld, in
silence and indignation, the entrance of their hated enemies into the
residence of Theodoric.

The Gothic nobles assembled in a hall in the gaily-decorated palace,
near the apartment of the King.

The latter, as the hour for the entrance of Belisarius approached,
prepared to don his royal garments--with great contentment, for it was
the last time that he would ever wear the signs of a dignity which had
brought him nothing but pain and wretchedness.

"Go, Duke Guntharis," he said to the Wölfung, "Hildebad, my faithless
chamberlain, has left me; thou, therefore, must take his place. The
attendant will show thee the golden chest which contains the crown,
helm, and purple mantle, the sword and shield of Theodoric. To-day, for
the first and last time, I will array myself in them, in order to
deliver them to a hero who will wear them not unworthily. What noise is
that?"

"Sire," answered Earl Wisand, "it is a Gothic woman. She has tried to
force her way in thrice already. Send her away!"

"No; tell her I will listen to her later. She shall ask for me this
evening at the palace."

As Guntharis left the room, Bessas entered with Cethegus.

The Prefect had given Bessas--without initiating him into the
secret--the duplicate of the capitulation, which the King had yet to
sign. He thought that Witichis would take the document more
unsuspiciously from an innocent hand.

Witichis greeted them as they entered; but at the sight of the Prefect
there passed a shadow across his countenance, which had before been
brighter than for many months. But he forced himself to say:

"You here, Prefect of Rome? The war has ended very differently to what
we expected! However, you may be satisfied. At least no Grecian
Emperor, no Justinian, will rule over your Rome."

"And shall not, as long as I live."

"I come, King of the Goths," interrupted Bessas, "to lay before you the
treaty with Belisarius, in order that you may sign it."

"I have already done so."

"It is the duplicate intended for my master."

"Then give it me," said Witichis, and stretched out his hand to take
it.

But before he could do so, Duke Guntharis hurried into the room with
the attendant.

"Witichis," he cried, "the royal insignia have disappeared!"

"What sayest thou?" asked Witichis. "Hildebad alone kept the key!"

"The golden chest and other chests are gone. Within the empty niche,
where they usually stood, lay this strip of parchment. The characters
are those of Hildebad's secretary."

The King took it and read:

"'Crown, helm and sword, purple and shield of Theodoric are in my care.
If Belisarius will have them, he may fetch them.' The Runic character
H-- for Hildebad!"

"He must be followed until he yield them up," cried Cethegus.

At this moment Demetrius and Johannes hurried in.

"Make haste. King Witichis," they cried. "Do you hear the trumpets?
Belisarius has already reached the Gate of Stilicho."

"Then let us go," said Witichis, allowing his attendant to place the
purple mantle, which they had brought instead of the missing one, upon
his shoulders, and pressing a golden coronet upon his head. Instead of
the sword, a sceptre was handed to him; and thus adorned, he turned to
the door.

"You have not yet signed, King," said Bessas.

"Give it to me," and now Witichis took the parchment from the hand of
the Byzantine. "The document is very long," he said, glancing over it;
and then began to read.

"Haste, King," said Johannes.

"There is no time to read it," said Cethegus, with an indifferent
voice, and took a reed-pen from the table.

"Then there is no time to sign it," said the King. "You know I am the
'_Peasant_-King,' as the people call me. And a peasant never signs a
letter before he has read to what he commits himself. Let us go," and,
smiling, he gave the document to the Prefect and left the room.

Bessas and all present followed, except Cethegus. Cethegus crushed the
document in his hand.

"Wait!" he whispered furiously. "You shall yet sign!" And he slowly
followed the others.

The hall leading to the King's apartment was already empty. The Prefect
went into the vaulted gallery which ran round the quadrangle of the
first story of the palace. The Byzantine-Roman arches afforded a free
outlook into the large courtyard. It was filled with armed men. At all
the four doors were placed the Persian lance-bearers of Belisarius.

Cethegus leaned against an archway and, watching the course of events,
spoke to himself.

"Well, there are Byzantines enough to take a small army prisoner!
Friend Procopius is prudent. There! Witichis appears at the door. His
Goths are still far behind upon the staircase. The King's horse is led
forward. Bessas holds the stirrups. Witichis is close to it; he lifts
his foot. Now comes a blast of trumpets. The door of the staircase is
closed and the Goths shut into the palace! Procopius tears down the
Gothic flag on the roof. Johannes takes the King's right arm--bravo,
Johannes! The King defends himself valiantly--but his long mantle
hinders him--he staggers! He falls to the ground! There lies the
kingdom of the Goths!"


"There lies the kingdom of the Goths!" with these words Procopius also
concluded the sentences which he wrote down in his diary that night.

"To-day I have assisted in making an important piece of history," he
wrote, "and will take note of it to-night. When I saw the imperial army
enter the gates and the King's palace of Ravenna, I thought that indeed
it is not always merit, virtue, or number that ensures success. There
is a higher power, inevitable necessity. In number and heroism the
Goths were superior to us, and they did not fail in every possible
exertion. The Gothic women in Ravenna scolded their husbands to their
faces when they saw the slight forms, the small number of our troops as
they marched in. Summa: in the most righteous cause, with the most
heroic efforts, a man or a nation may succumb, if superior powers,
which have not always the better right on their side, oppose him. My
heart beat with a sense of wrong as I tore down the Gothic flag and set
the golden Dragon of Justinian in its place, as I raised the flag of
evil above the flag of righteousness. Not justice, but a necessity
which is inscrutable, rules the fate of men and nations. But that does
not confuse a true man. For not _what_ we do, live, or suffer--_how_ we
do or bear it, makes a man a hero. The Goths' defeat is more honourable
than our victory. And the hand which tore down their banner will
chronicle the fame of this people for future generations.
Notwithstanding, however that may be--there lies the kingdom of the
Goths!"

FOOTNOTE:
[Footnote 1: Procopius, in his "Wars of the Goths," vol. i., pp. 7, 18,
places here, in mistake, the Tiber instead of the Anio.]




                            END OF VOL. II.



             BILLING AND SONS, PRINTERS, GUILDFORD, SURREY.

                                                      _H. L. & Co._













End of Project Gutenberg's A Struggle for Rome, Vol. 2 (of 3), by Felix Dahn

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A STRUGGLE FOR ROME, VOL. 2 (OF 3) ***

***** This file should be named 32330-8.txt or 32330-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/3/3/32330/

Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the Web Archive

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
</doc>
<doc id="file28566137" filename="pg68210.txt" parent_folder="History" url="https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/68210/pg68210.txt">
The Project Gutenberg eBook of Portuguese portraits, by Aubrey F. G.
Bell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Portuguese portraits

Author: Aubrey F. G. Bell

Release Date: May 30, 2022 [eBook #68210]

Language: English

Produced by: The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PORTUGUESE PORTRAITS ***





PORTUGUESE PORTRAITS




_By the same Author_

  THE MAGIC OF SPAIN, 1912.
  IN PORTUGAL, 1912.
  POEMS FROM THE PORTUGUESE, 1913.
  STUDIES IN PORTUGUESE LITERATURE, 1914.
  LYRICS OF GIL VICENTE, 1914.
  PORTUGAL OF THE PORTUGUESE, 1915.


  New York Agents
  LONGMANS, GREEN & CO.
  FOURTH AVENUE AND 30TH STREET




[Illustration: NUN’ ALVAREZ.

From the earliest (1526) edition of the _Cronica_.

  [_Frontispiece._]




  PORTUGUESE PORTRAITS

  BY

  AUBREY F. G. BELL

  _A notavel fama dos excelentes barões e muito antiguos antecessores
  dina de perpetua lembrança_

  DUARTE PACHECO PEREIRA, _Esmeraldo_


  Oxford
  B. H. BLACKWELL, BROAD STREET
  MCMXVII




TO

  THE COUNTLESS FORGOTTEN HEROES
  OF PORTUGAL

  In burning sands or Ocean’s blinding silt,
  In Africa, Asia, and the icy North,
  They lie: yet came they home who thus went forth,
  Since of their bones is all their country built.




Preface


Not seven, nor seventy, names exhaust the tale of Portugal’s great
men. The reader need but turn to the fascinating pages of Portuguese
history. There he will find a plentiful feast set out before him--the
epic strife between Portuguese and Moor, Portuguese and Spaniard,
and deeds of high emprise in the foam of perilous seas and the
ever-mysterious lands of the East. His delight will be impaired unless
he can follow the events in detail in the chronicles and histories of
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and for this a knowledge of
Portuguese is requisite, since there are few satisfactory translations.
But it is as easy to acquire a sufficient knowledge of Portuguese to
read it with pleasure as it is difficult to write or speak it.

There is a whole literature, often not less attractive in style than in
subject, of histories, memoirs, travels, accounts of wrecks and sieges,
recording the deeds of the Portuguese on and beyond the seas. Of the
battle of Ourique (1139) Portuguese historians have loved to tell how
the Moors numbered 600,000 (since to say 900,000 were an exaggeration)
and how, heavy rain having fallen after the battle, the streams that
flowed into the far-distant Guadiana ran red with blood. But there were
scrupulous and moderate chroniclers like Fernam Lopez and Azurara, and
many of the historians of India were sober writers whose narratives
(those, for instance, of Fernam Lopez de Castanheda, Diogo do Couto,
and Gaspar Correa) bear the stamp of truth while they delight the
reader by their wealth of detail and personal anecdote.

They may be pardoned for declaring that their heroes’ achievements
outshone those of Greek and Roman. For indeed the half-century
(1498-1548) between the voyage of Vasco da Gama and the death of
Dom João de Castro is thick with names; the great men tread on one
another’s heels in the halls of fame, worthily continuing the work of
their predecessors during four centuries in Portugal. Sousa, Mello,
Meneses, Cunha, Castro, Noronha, Mascarenhas, Coutinho, Pereira,
Pacheco, Almeida, Azevedo, Sá, Silva, Silveira--these are names the
very catalogue of which must be music to a Portuguese, and which would
require a large volume to chronicle in detail.

And many women hold a high place in Portuguese history, as the
Queen-Saint Elizabeth (or Isabel),[1] the stout-hearted bakeress of
Aljubarrota, Brites (Beatrice) de Almeida, who slew, if we are to trust
the tradition, seven Spaniards with her wooden baker’s shovel, or the
heroines of Diu.[2]

Among the men there is Affonso Henriquez, first King of Portugal, half
French by birth, and grandson of the Spanish King of Leon, but in heart
and action wholly Portuguese; loyal Egas Moniz; Gualdim Paes and other
legendary heroes in the conflict with the Moors which transformed
Portugal from a dependent province into a free kingdom; and later, if
not less legendary, Fernão Rodriguez Pacheco, the astute defender of
Celorico, who in starvation by a miracle obtained a fish and sent it to
the besieger to show that plenty reigned in the town; or the defender
of Coimbra, Martim Freitas, heroically, almost quixotically loyal to
the deposed King Sancho II.

On the sea the first to signalise himself was Fuas Roupinho, in the
twelfth century; and thenceforth Portugal never failed to produce hardy
if obscure seamen, to fish for cod in the Northern Seas or to discover
the west coast of Africa till Bartholomeu Diaz rounded the Cape of
Storms in 1487, and King João II rechristened it the Cape of Good
Hope.[3]

João II (1481-95), “the Perfect Prince,” or as Queen Isabella of Spain
more bluntly called him _el hombre_, “the man,” was one of a series
of great kings of the House of Avis, founded by João I (1385-1433)
“of good memory,” darling of the Lisbon people. João I was succeeded
by his eldest son, the noble but unfortunate student-king Duarte
(1433-8). Other brothers of Prince Henry the Navigator, scarcely less
famous, were the Infante Pedro, statesman and author, who travelled
through “the seven parts of the world,” and the Infante Fernando, who
died slowly with saintly patient heroism as a prisoner of the Moors in
Africa.

Under Manoel I (1495-1521) the Great, the Fortunate, and his son João
III (1521-57), Gama, Albuquerque and Dom João de Castro are the most
conspicuous names; but Dom Francisco de Almeida, first Viceroy of
India, Pedro Alvarez Cabral, discoverer of Brazil, Fernão de Magalhães,
the harsh and fiery navigator[4] who first penetrated by sea to the
North Pacific and was slain in the hour of his triumph--his name
lives in the Straits of Magellan--and many more were almost equally
celebrated. But especially among the discoverers and early adventurers
in India the men of fame are but types of hundreds of less fortunate
heroes who perished. Men left Portugal with their lives in their hands,
and for every one who (like Fernam Mendez Pinto) survived to tell the
tale scores sailed away who were never seen or heard of afterwards.

Yet the population of Portugal in the first third of the sixteenth
century may have been but 1,500,000, and certainly did not reach twice
that figure. That is a fact that must uplift and inspire those who
study Portugal’s history or consider her future. For the Portuguese of
the sixteenth century fought not against or not only against hordes of
undisciplined savages, but against Moors and Turks highly civilised and
well equipped with artillery.

Perhaps the secret of their success is that their motto was “God, King,
and Country,” and that each man among them relied, under Heaven, on
himself, not on this or that sect or party or philosophy, election
promises or political programmes. They did not wait and watch for some
wonderful Ism, like a brazen serpent, to change the face of the world:
they as individuals simply, persistently set to work and--changed it.
In less than fifty years after the Portuguese first reached India they
were in Japan, converting and civilising the Japanese, and had made
possible that tremendous saying of Camões:

  E se mais mundo houvera lá chegára.

And had there been more world they would have reached it.

That is, of course, a terrible condemnation as well as an undying
honour, for unless each generation were to produce an Albuquerque there
could be no hope of maintaining conquests so wide, and Albuquerque had
had his hands tied by his own countrymen, so that, like the blinded
Samson, he achieved the ruin of his enemies by his unaided strength
and at the expense of his own life. But if Portuguese statesmanship
was at fault in India, there never failed a sprinkling of individuals
who spent their lives in ungrudging service and heroic effort to
counterbalance errors committed, and often died heartbroken for their
pains.

Two anecdotes will give an idea of the spirit that animated the
Portuguese in the sixteenth century. During the siege of Diu a soldier,
Fernão Penteado, seriously wounded in the head, went to the surgeon,
but, finding him busy with other wounded and hearing the noise of a
Turkish attack, he returned to the fight and came back with a second
serious wound in the head, only to find the surgeon busier than
before. Again he went to fight, and when the surgeon was finally able
to attend to him he had a third wound, in his right arm.

The second incident occurred in North-West Africa. During a fight Dom
Affonso da Cunha, aiming a mighty cut with his sword at a Moor, missed
him, and the sword leapt from his hand. “Go fetch it, you dog!” roared
Cunha, and the terror-stricken Moor obediently picked it up and gave it
to him, trembling. Cunha thereupon spared his life.

Such were those Portuguese of old, persistent, brave, proud,
magnificent. And something of their spirit survives in the Portugal of
to-day, ready to reappear at a crisis--more of it, perhaps, than is
generally imagined.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Antonio Coelho Gasco in his _Conquista, Antiguidade e Nobreza
da mui insigne e inclita Cidade de Coimbra_ (Lisboa, 1805) drew the
following rash picture of her from an ancient portrait at Coimbra:
“This very saintly lady was of gigantic frame and very stout, very
white and very red, with a long face and large serene green eyes, nose
rather low with wide nostrils, head long and beautiful.”

[2] Isabel Fernandez, Barbara Fernandez, and Isabel Madeira. Later
heroines at home were Isabel Pereira in the defence of Ouguella against
the Spanish in 1644 and Elena Perez in the similar siege of Monção in
1656.

[3] The Portuguese accounts of these discoveries are most vivid and
minute, a fascinating introduction to the geography of what is now
largely part of the British Empire.

[4] Garcia da Orta introduces him with the words “The Devil entered
into a Portuguese.”




Contents


  I

                               PAGE

  KING DINIS                      1


  II

  NUN’ ALVAREZ                   17


  III

  PRINCE HENRY THE NAVIGATOR     47


  IV

  VASCO DA GAMA                  61


  V

  DUARTE PACHECO PEREIRA         79


  VI

  AFFONSO DE ALBUQUERQUE        103


  VII

  DOM JOÃO DE CASTRO            127




List of Illustrations


  NUN’ ALVAREZ                                            _Frontispiece_
  From the earliest (1526) edition of the _Cronica_.

                                                             FACING PAGE

  PRINCE HENRY THE NAVIGATOR                                          49

  VASCO DA GAMA                                                       63

  AFFONSO DE ALBUQUERQUE                                             105
  From Gaspar Correa, _Lendas da India_, frontispiece to vol. ii. pt. 1.

  JOÃO DE CASTRO                                                     129




I

KING DINIS

(1261-1325)

  Co’ este o reino prospero florece.

  CAMÕES, _Os Lusiadas_.

  Um Dinis que ha de admirar o mundo.

  ANTONIO DE SOUSA DE MACEDO, _Ulyssippo_.


When Henry of the French House of Burgundy became Count of Portugal
in 1095 he merely held a province in fealty to the King of Leon, but
by his son, the great Affonso I’s victories over the Moors it almost
automatically became an independent kingdom. The second king, Sancho
I, who has so many points of resemblance to King Dinis, further
established the new realm, and he and his successors continued to
wrest territory from the Moors. In the reign of the fifth king, Dinis’
father, Affonso III, the conquest of Algarve was completed, and the
only remaining difficulty was the claim of the kings of Castille to
this region.

Dinis, born on October 9, 1261, was but a few years old when he
was sent to Seville to win the consent of his mother’s father, the
celebrated Alfonso the Learned, to waive his right to the latest
Portuguese conquest. As the shrewd Affonso III had foreseen, he proved
a successful diplomatist. Alfonso X, enchanted with the grave, courtly
bearing of his little grandson, knighted him and sent him home with all
his requests granted.

Thus it came about that when Dinis, to whom his father had given a
separate household but a few months before, ascended the throne at the
age of seventeen, he was the first king to begin to reign over Portugal
with its modern boundaries, from the River Minho to Faro. Two centuries
of great deeds had achieved this result--two more were to pass before
Spain was likewise entirely free of the Moorish invader--and Dinis now
in a reign of half a century (1279-1325) saw to it that the heroism
and sacrifices of his ancestors had not been in vain.

His tutor had been a Frenchman, Ébrard de Cahors, who now became Bishop
of Coimbra, and the fame of his grandfather Alfonso X was spread
through the whole Peninsula. But, young as he was, Dinis at once made
it clear that he intended to rule as the national King of Portugal
and had resolution enough to withstand the Castilian influence of his
mother and Alfonso X. His first care was to acquaint himself thoroughly
with his kingdom, and he spent the great part of the first year of his
reign in visiting the country, paying especial attention to the still
almost deserted region of Alentejo.

But the first years of his reign were not entirely peaceful, for his
younger brother Affonso laid claim to the throne. Dinis was born before
the Pope had legitimised Affonso III’s second marriage; Affonso,
two years his junior, afterwards: hence the partisans of the latter
affected to consider Dinis illegitimate. The dispute was scarcely
settled when Dinis married Isabel, daughter of Pedro III of Aragon,
who proved so efficacious a mediator in the even more serious troubles
at the end of his reign, and, after sharing his throne for forty-three
years, is still venerated as the Queen-Saint of Portugal.

In his differences with Castile, Dinis was successful, both in peace
and war, and it was a tribute to his character and authority that he
was chosen as arbitrator between the claims of the kings of Castille
and Aragon. At home he was confronted by a powerful secular clergy,
by the excessive and growing wealth of the religious orders, and by
an overweening nobility, while his newly conquered kingdom urgently
required hands to till it and walls and castles for its defence. Dinis
dealt with all these problems in a spirit of equal wisdom and firmness,
upholding the rights of the throne and the rights of the people till he
had welded a scattered crowd of individuals into a nation.

His quarrel with the clergy, who protested that the King had infringed
their rights, was referred to Rome, and in 1289 a formal but not a
lasting agreement was reached.

Two years later the King checked the ever-growing possessions of the
religious orders by a law limiting their right to gifts and legacies.
Their wealth was the result of the great part they had played during
the long conflict against the Moors, but it naturally began to prove
inconvenient to King and people in time of peace. The nobles were
in like case, and Dinis showed the same resolution towards them and
abolished certain of their privileges.

He could protect as well as check. When the Knights Templar were
abolished by the Pope, Dinis secured an exception for Portugal and
reorganised them as the Order of Christ in 1319. Indeed he was
essentially a builder, not a demolisher. In 1290 he founded the
University of Coimbra; in 1308 he renewed and consolidated the
treaty between Portugal and England; in 1317 he invited to Portugal
a Genoese, Manuel Pezagno, to organise his fleet and command it as
Admiral.

He encouraged agriculture, calling the peasants the “nerves of the
republic” and passed many laws to ensure their security, so that in his
reign men began to go in safety along the roads of Portugal, hitherto
infested by brigands, and he divided grants of land among the poor
of the towns. He planted near Leiria the pines which still form so
delightful a feature of the country between that town and Alcobaça.

Some have called King Dinis a miser, others declare that in his reign
there was a saying “liberal as King Dinis.” It is certain that he
expended his money wisely, and, while no early king ever accomplished
more for the land over which he ruled, he left a full treasury at his
death. The charge of avarice perhaps arose from the charming legend
which so well exemplifies the simplicity of those times.

The Queen was in the habit of distributing bread daily to a large
number of poor, and Dinis, who perhaps would rather have seen them
digging the soil, forbade the charity. Queen Isabel continued as
before, and one morning the King met her as she went out with her apron
full of bread.

“What have you there?” said King Dinis.

“Roses,” said the Queen.

“Let me see them,” said King Dinis.

And behold the Queen’s apron was filled with roses.

In the matter of buildings King Dinis not only fortified many towns
with castles and walls, but founded numerous churches and convents. The
traveller in Portugal even now can scarcely pass a day without coming
upon something to remind him of the sixth King of Portugal. The convent
of Odivellas, the cloisters of Alcobaça, the beautiful ruins of the
castle above Leiria are but three of many instances which show how King
Dinis’ work survives even in the twentieth century.

It was said of him that--

  Whate’er he willed
  Dinis fulfilled.

But he nearly always wrought even better than he knew. He realised
no doubt that Portugal was an all-but-island, especially when the
relations with Castille were unfriendly; but he could scarcely foresee
that of his pinewoods would be built the “ships that went to the
discovery of new worlds and seas”; that a future Master of his new
Order of Christ would devote its vast revenues to the great work of
exploring the West Coast of Africa, the work which bore so important a
share in transforming Europe from all that we connect with mediævalism
to all that is modern; that his embryo fleet would grow and prosper
till Portugal became the foremost sea-power; or that the treaty with
England would still be bearing fruit six centuries after his death.

The University, too, lasted and became one of the glories of Portugal,
and a source of many of her greatest men in the sixteenth century.
Since the sixteenth century, after being several times moved from
Coimbra to Lisbon and from Lisbon to Coimbra, it has been fixed in
the little town on the right bank of the Mondego and remains one of
the most treasured possessions of modern Portugal. The quality that
explains how so many of King Dinis’ institutions endured and prospered
marvellously in succeeding centuries was thoroughness, the conviction
that any work, however humble, if thoroughly done must bear excellent
fruit, and a certain solidity which finds little satisfaction in
feeding beggars precariously, but great satisfaction in setting them to
work on the land.

Perhaps, then, it may come as a surprise that King Dinis was also a
poet, one of the greatest of Portugal’s early poets. We have nearly one
hundred and fifty poems under his name. He may not have written them
all, some may have been composed by the palace _jograes_, but he showed
his good taste and inclination for the national and popular elements in
writing or collecting not only poems in the Provençal manner, then on
the wane in Portugal, but that older, indigenous poetry which is the
most charming feature of early Portuguese literature.

And King Dinis’ poems are among the most charming of all. Here is one
of his quaint popular songs, the fascination of which is only faintly
discernible in translation:

  Friend and lover mine
  --Be God our shield!--
  See the flower o’ the pine
  And fare afield.

  Friend and lover, ah me!
  --Be God our shield!--
  See the flower on the tree
  And fare afield.

  See the flower o’ the pine
  --Be God our shield!--
  Saddle the colt so fine
  And fare afield.

  See the flower on the tree
  --Be God our shield!--
  The bay horse fair to see
  And fare afield.

  Saddle the little bay
  --Be God our shield--
  Hasten, my love, away,
  And fare afield.

  The horse so fair to see
  --Be God our shield!--
  My friend, come speedily
  To fare afield.

It was King Dinis’ affection for his illegitimate son, Dom Affonso
Sanchez, also a poet, that brought trouble on the latter years of his
reign. His eldest son and the heir to the throne, Affonso, jealous
of the regard, the lands, and privileges bestowed upon Dom Affonso
Sanchez, afraid perhaps that the King might devise a way of leaving
him the throne, rose in rebellion in 1320 and advanced through Minho
to Leiria and Coimbra, ravaging the country as he came. The King, now
nearly sixty years old, set out against him and several engagements
were fought: it was not till 1322 that Queen Isabel succeeded after
strenuous exertions in bringing about peace.

The reconciliation was but temporary. Dom Affonso Sanchez retired to
Spain, but returned, and the Prince Affonso rose in arms again in
1323. Again Queen Isabel, going from one to the other, exerted herself
to make peace. King Dinis, his anger now thoroughly roused, was not
easily appeased. Finally he agreed to increase the Prince’s income,
and, much against his will, to part once more from Dom Affonso Sanchez.

Not many months after this settlement King Dinis fell ill at Lisbon,
where he had been born, and which he made the real centre of his
kingdom (his instinct unfailing in this as in other matters concerning
the future greatness of his country). Prince Affonso was summoned from
Leiria, and a sincere reconciliation followed. The Queen watched day
and night by her husband’s bedside, and to her his last words were
spoken when on January 7, 1325, one of the greatest of Portugal’s kings
died. He was buried according to his wish in the Convent of São Dinis
de Odivellas, which he had founded near Lisbon.

Three hundred years after his death it was still the custom in
Portuguese law-courts for a prayer to be said for his soul; and if
we consider how far-reaching, how immense were the results of the
measures taken by this strong-willed, wise, and energetic ruler, we
may conclude that the custom might well be continued in the twentieth
century. Humane and affable (_conversavel_, the quality of so many
great men), he won the personal love of his people and gave them
immediate prosperity, but he also, apparently, saw deep into the
future.




II

NUN’ ALVAREZ

(1360-1431)

 Mas quem podera dignamente contar os louvores deste virtuoso barom,
 cujas obras e discretos autos seemdo todos postos em escrito ocupariam
 gram parte deste livro?--FERNAM LOPEZ, _Cronica del Rei Dom Joam_.


Fifty years after the death of King Dinis it seemed as if the kingdom
that he had so carefully built up was to crumble away like dry sand.
The disorders and extravagances of King Ferdinand’s reign had brought
it to the verge of ruin, and the marriage of his only child Beatrice
with the King of Castille in 1383 appeared to destroy the last hope of
an independent Portugal.

It is ten years before that date that Nun’ Alvarez Pereira, to whom
mainly Portugal was to owe her continued existence as a separate
nation, first comes on the scene. His father was the powerful Prior of
Crato, Dom Alvaro Gonçalvez Pereira, in high favour at Court, son of
the Archbishop of Braga and descendant of a long line of nobles. His
mother, Iria Gonçalvez, was lady-in-waiting to the Princess Beatrice.

In 1373 there was war between Portugal and Castile, and a rumour spread
that the enemy was approaching Santarem. The Prior sent Nuno and one
of his brothers with a few horsemen to reconnoitre. On their return
they were received by the King and Queen. Queen Lianor, struck by
the bearing of the shy, precocious boy of thirteen, took him for her
squire, and the King knighted him, after a suit of armour of his size
had at last been found, belonging to the king’s half-brother John, the
Master of Avis, he who was king thereafter.

For three years in the palace the Queen’s squire gave his days to
riding and the chase, and to the reading of books of chivalry, of Sir
Galahad and the knights of the Round Table. Then his father arranged a
marriage for him with the rich and noble Dona Lianor d’Alvim, a young
widow of Minho.

Marriage was not in Nuno’s thoughts, but Dona Lianor had consented, the
King approved, and reluctantly he yielded. His life on their estate
was happy. Fifteen squires and thirty henchmen were in attendance in
their house, and after hearing his daily mass Nun’ Alvarez would spend
long days hunting the boar and the wolf in the wooded hills of Minho or
exchanging visits with the Minhoto nobility.

Of their three children two sons died in infancy; the daughter,
Beatriz, was married to the Count of Barcellos, son of King João I, and
through her Nun’ Alvarez was the ancestor of that line of kings which
was still reigning in 1910.

It was a life too quiet for the times, and a few years later Nuno was
ordered to Portalegre to defend with his brothers the frontier against
the Spanish. As they marched from Villa Viçosa to Elvas, Nuno, the wish
father of the thought in his keenness to encounter the enemy, mistook
the glint of the morning sun on the lances of their own footmen, who
had been sent on ahead, for the enemy advancing and gave the alarm. To
his vexation there was no fighting, and when he challenged the son of
the Master of Santiago to combat, ten against ten, the king forbade the
encounter, and the Earl of Cambridge, then at the Portuguese Court, to
whom Nun’ Alvarez appealed, pleaded for him in vain.

In 1382 a powerful Spanish fleet besieged Lisbon. The defence of the
city was entrusted to Nun’ Alvarez and his brothers. It was in late
summer, _quando l’uva imbruna_, and parties from the fleet would land
to gather grapes and other fruit. Nun’ Alvarez saw his opportunity
and, leaving the city one night with some fifty horse and foot, lay in
ambush in the vines by the bridge of Alcantara. The first boatload of
twenty Spaniards to land was driven headlong into the sea, but a larger
force came ashore and the Portuguese, seeing themselves outnumbered
five to one, fled.

Nun’ Alvarez, left alone, spurred his horse to a gallop and dashed into
the midst of the enemy. His excellent armour stood him in good stead,
but his lance was shattered, his horse cut down, and one of his spurs
caught in the saddle as he fell. Thus disabled he still fought on, and
then for very shame his followers turned to assist him. The first to
come up was a Lisbon priest, afterwards Canon of Lisbon Cathedral.

Nun’ Alvarez, hearing a few months later that the King was to engage
the enemy between Elvas and Badajoz, proposed to his elder brother
Pedr’ Alvarez, who had succeeded their father as Prior of Crato, that
they should have a hand in the fighting. Pedro, who had orders to
defend Lisbon and intended to obey them, refused, and, having previous
acquaintance of Nuno’s methods, gave instructions that no armed
persons should be allowed to leave the city. Nuno with a few attendants
dashed past the guard at the gate and rode post-haste to Elvas. He was
well received by the king, but again there was no fighting. Peace and
the betrothal of Beatrice were celebrated in a banquet at Elvas. King
Ferdinand was too ill to attend, but King Juan was present.

Nun’ Alvarez, in his bitterness at seeing Portugal given over to
Castille, for once forgot his manners. He and his brother Fernão, going
in more leisurely than the rest, found all the tables crowded, and,
unable to obtain a place, he pushed away the support from one of the
tables, which went crashing to the ground, and calmly went out. King
Juan remarked that he who so acted had a heart for greater things, but,
in the words of the old chronicle, had they been Castilians he might
have spoken differently.

After King Ferdinand’s death Nun’ Alvarez, brooding over his country’s
wrongs, keenly took the part of the young Master of Avis. He was not
present at the murder of the Queen’s favourite, the Count Andeiro, but
he approved the act, and when news of it reached him at Santarem he
hastened to Lisbon to the Master of Avis.

It was at Santarem one evening as he sauntered along the banks of the
Tagus after supper that he chanced to pass the door of an armourer
and sent for his sword to be sharpened. The _alfageme_ refused any
payment till he should return as Count of Ourem. Hail to thee, Thane of
Cawdor! The story adds that Nun’ Alvarez, returning Conde de Ourem to
Santarem after the battle of Aljubarrota, found the armourer in prison
as a friend of Castille and his property confiscated, and was able, by
protecting him, to pay his debt.

Nun’ Alvarez now became one of the Prince of Avis’ Council, his most
loyal and most trusted counsellor to the end of their lives. His first
important command was in Alentejo, and after delaying in order to take
part in a fight with eight Spanish ships in the Tagus he set out at the
head of his two hundred horsemen. Henceforth Evora, the ancient walled
city in the wide plain of Alentejo, was his headquarters. He instilled
confidence into his men and increased his army, although it rarely
exceeded five hundred horse and as many thousand foot, and was often
very much below that number.

The war continued with varying success. At one time Nun’ Alvarez
advanced to Badajoz, at another the Spanish were at Viana, but a
couple of leagues from Evora across the flowered _charneca_. But Nun’
Alvarez seized town after town and more than once defeated the enemy
in the open field. Monsaraz was taken by a wile, for some cows were
driven temptingly beneath the walls and when the commander sallied out
to seize them the Portuguese rushed in through the open gate. Nun’
Alvarez’ favourite method was to ride all night across the _charneca_
and appear unexpectedly before a town in the early dawn, so that the
enemy called him “Dawn Nuno,” _Nuno Madrugada_.

Thus he attacked Almada. He had but recently taken Palmella on the
height overlooking the Tagus, and, hunting in the neighbourhood, had
slain a boar and sent it as a present to the commander of Almada,
promising to pay him a visit soon. He now set out to ride thither by
night across the _charneca_, but they lost their way in the many paths,
and the sun was up when Nun’ Alvarez, in his eagerness outriding his
companions, advanced alone into the town. Four squires presently came
up to his support, and Almada was taken without difficulty.

The Master of Avis had summoned Nun’ Alvarez to Lisbon or Nun’ Alvarez
had determined to see the Master. From Palmella one night looking
across the river he saw the whole city apparently in flames. Not
knowing that the fires were lit by the King of Castille, whom plague
in his camp had forced to raise the siege, and aware that the Master
had powerful enemies within the walls, he watched the conflagration in
dismay, but next morning the city reappeared in all its beauty.

The Spanish fleet remained in the Tagus, and a squire besought Nun’
Alvarez not to cross, saying that he had dreamt that the enemy had
captured him as he passed through their fleet. Nun’ Alvarez went on his
way, leaving the squire with his dream on the further shore. When he
was in mid-stream, still perhaps thinking of the timid _escudeiro_, he
bade his trumpets blow the enemy a challenge. But the Castilians little
imagined what a prey was within their grasp, and his small boat passed
through safely to Lisbon.

A little later he joined the Master of Avis at Torres Vedras and
together they advanced to Coimbra, where the Master was crowned king as
João I. His first act was to appoint Nun’ Alvarez his Constable.

At Oporto, whither he went to organise a fleet, Nun’ Alvarez found his
wife and daughter, who had been prisoners of the Castilians for a time
at Guimarães.

From Oporto he set out on a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela. His
purpose was threefold, “to serve God in pilgrimage,” to reduce Minho
on the way, and to secure mounts for his men. But the River Minho
was too swollen to cross, and the news that Braga was wavering thus
came opportunely. Leaving Viana do Castello he turned east along the
beautiful valley of the Lima and seized the little granite town of
Ponte do Lima and Braga on its steep hill. The King had also come
north, but the news that King Juan had crossed the Beira frontier and
was advancing rapidly into the heart of Portugal brought them south
again.

At Abrantes the King held a council. Many were of opinion that he
should not advance further against the enemy. Nun’ Alvarez--the same
Nuno who had ridden alone into two hundred and fifty of the enemy
on the banks of the Tagus and advanced alone into Almada--thereupon
set out with his men, and in the name of God and Saint George sent a
challenge to the King of Castille. Each fresh success of Nun’ Alvarez
had raised him envious backbiters in Portugal, and here was a new
opportunity to accuse him of arrogance. King João silenced his accusers
by following him to Thomar.

They then went west to Ourem and took up a position towards Leiria.
The advance of the King of Castille caused them to turn the front of
their battle towards the little village of Aljubarrota. The Portuguese,
barely 5,000 strong, were outnumbered seven to one, but they were
drawn up on foot in a small compact force and desperate, flight being
practically cut off. On the right was the _Ala dos Namorados_, the
lovers’ wing, pledged to yield no inch of ground; on the left fought a
few hundred English archers, _gens-d’armes Anglois si peu qu’il en y
avoit_, says Froissart.

The Spanish chronicler and poet, Pero Lopez de Ayala, and Nun’ Alvarez’
brother Diogo rode over before the battle and asked to speak with him
alone, but succeeded neither in winning him to their side nor in
casting suspicion on his loyalty. As he had said when fighting against
his brothers earlier in Alentejo, for the land that gave him birth he
would fight against his own father.

At nine o’clock on the morning of August 15, 1385, the battle began
with a great hurling of stones, followed by fighting with the lance,
and then at still closer quarters with axe and sword. Nun’ Alvarez was
constantly where the fight raged most fiercely, and his words “Fight,
Portuguese, fight for king and country” kept ringing out above the din.
The flower of Castilian chivalry fell that day and many Portuguese
nobles fighting for Castille. Nun’ Alvarez saw his brother the Master
of Calatrava fall pierced by a lance, but was never able to find his
body. The King of Castille fled to Santarem. The Convent of Alcobaça
still preserves a huge cauldron taken from the enemy at Aljubarrota,
but the noblest memorial of Nun’ Alvarez’ victory is the Church and
Monastery of Batalha.

Nun’ Alvarez, not yet as old as Napoleon when he conquered Italy,
crossed the Guadiana with a few hundred horse and a few thousand foot
and advanced into Castille. All the nobles from the south of Spain who
had not been present at Aljubarrota collected to give him battle. The
enemy, he was told, were as the grass of the field in number. “All the
greater will be our honour,” said Nun’ Alvarez.

A trumpeter with a bundle of rods knelt before Nun’ Alvarez seated to
receive him: “My Lord Constable, the Master of Santiago, my lord, sends
to defy you with this rod,” and the Master of Calatrava, the Master of
Alcantara, the Count of Medina Celi and many another had sent him rods
of defiance. The Constable received them one by one patiently, gave the
messenger a hundred gold pieces and bade him thank the senders for the
rods with which he would presently come and beat them.

The battle of Valverde that followed was an attack of several hills
from which the enemy had to be dislodged. “If Portuguese kneel in
battle,” said a later, sixteenth-century historian, “it is to the Cross
of Christ”; and certainly it was from no fear or weakness that Nun’
Alvarez, wounded by an arrow in the foot, knelt to pray in the thickest
of the fight. Anxious messengers came up with news that his men were
hard pressed, imploring his presence, but he, without answering, still
knelt in prayer. At last rising with a look of great joy he ordered on
his standard to the attack, and a few hours later no Spaniard was to be
seen.

It was in memory of this battle that the Constable built the Church
and Convent of Carmo, still in its ruins one of the most beautiful of
Lisbon’s buildings. This was the last of his great battles, although he
saw much more fighting (for peace with Castille did not come for many
years), and when fifty-five years old took part in the expedition that
conquered Ceuta.

But his abiding fame was won when he was twenty-five. His success was
due to his singleness of purpose. The independence of Portugal was
his object, and to secure that object he put forth his whole strength
not only ungrudgingly, but with a passionate eagerness, his strength
based on deep piety and faith. A keen judge of men, he was terrible in
his calm disdain to those whom he suspected of shirking or treachery;
without a word of abuse on his part he made their humiliation
unbearable. But he inspired his followers with extraordinary
devotion. His clear, piercing eyes and his self-possession gave
them confidence--_des yeux pleins de mitraille et un air de
tranquillité_--and he was always generous in rewarding constancy and
valour. His energy, fearless courage and fervent serenity won many a
fight against overpowering odds.

His fame extended throughout Spain. One evening near Caceres ten
henchmen appeared before him. The Count received them kindly, and on
hearing that they were from Castille asked how they were so bold as to
come without safe-conduct. Relying on his great goodness, they said.
He then asked what he could do for them, and they announced that their
only object in coming was to see him, and now they had seen him; and
so, refusing the supper he ordered for them, they departed as they had
come.

Many incidents show his power over his own men. Once, when they were
unwilling to go forward to attack a superior force, he just stepped
across a stream and bade those who were willing to follow him cross it,
and not one held back.

On another occasion an uproar arose in his camp owing to the fact that
the day’s booty had consisted of “many and good wines.” The Constable
came unarmed from his tent, but many soldiers, seeing him thus and
hearing the noise, rushed forward to protect him and formed a canopy of
swords over his head.

The irregular pay and supplies received for his men made it difficult
to maintain strict discipline; for some days they lived entirely on
figs, then as now one of the principal fruits south of the Tagus; for
one whole day Nun’ Alvarez’ own food consisted merely of a piece of
dry bread, a turnip, and a drink of wine from the flask of a common
soldier. Another time there was no bread in the whole camp except five
small loaves reserved for Nun’ Alvarez’ table; five starving Englishmen
came up, and he entertained them to dinner, giving each a loaf of bread.

It was impossible in such circumstances to forbid or prevent plunder
when it was obtainable. But, although he was obliged to allow his
followers to live on the land, he set his face against any unnecessary
pilfering, and one squire, convicted of taking a chalice from a church,
he sentenced to be burnt--indeed, the wood was piled and the fire lit
before he pardoned him at the instance of his captains.

In the teeth of great opposition, too, he resolutely forbade the
presence of women in his camp.

He was not less renowned for his chivalry towards the weak, women,
prisoners, and peasants, than for his victories in battle. He provided
pensions for “women who had been honoured and prosperous and were now
poor.”

But his chivalry went further. A countess at Coimbra who had held out
against him, and then plotted to seize his person by treachery, he
secured from the reprisals of his followers; the wife of the commander
of a captured town he sent away free to Castille. And these were no
isolated instances; his conduct never varied in its simplicity, dignity
and charming thought for others.

His biographers love to tell of the poor blind man of Torres Vedras
who had no way of escaping from the advancing Castilians and whom Nun’
Alvarez carried behind him on his mule for four leagues out of the
town. “Oo que humano e caridoso señor!” exclaims the old chronicler.

But it is the incidents of an illness when he was between thirty
and forty that throw most light on his character and on the devoted
attachment of those around him. The fever and deep depression that
came over him seem to have been in part, at least, due to the perpetual
self-seeking and mendicity with which he had to deal now that he was
a power in the land as great as the King himself--greater, said his
enemies. Sometimes, we are told, he seemed to have recovered from
his illness, and then the very sight of a stranger, especially of a
man with a letter, would give him a relapse. His secretary found it
necessary to intercept all letters.

Nun’ Alvarez, who had sought health in vain at Lisbon, set out to
return to Evora. Accompanied by his mother and his daughter, he was
carried in a litter to Palmella. His illness prevented him from going
further, and he was taken to the small village of Alfarrara, where
there were many trees and streams. The very sight of the garden of the
_quinta_ where he was to lodge seemed to restore his health. Several of
the foremost citizens of Setubal came to welcome him, and he received
them gladly; but, as they were leaving, one of them (who was very
stout) had the misfortune to bid him “remember the town of Setubal.”

Nun’ Alvarez, thus reminded of “men with letters,” fell into so great
a passion and fever that he was like to die. He refused to eat, and
it was only after much coaxing that he was persuaded to sit down at
table. They brought him water for his hands and roast birds to eat. His
daughter began to carve them before him, and his mother fanned him with
a fan; but he refused to eat, telling his mother that “that bloated
churl with his Setubal has been the death of me.”

His secretary, Gil Airaz, would have excused the offender, but Nun’
Alvarez turned on him in a rage: “The fellow, for what he said,
deserved a score of blows, and if you cared for me or my health you
would have given him them.”

Gil Airaz said that there was still time, if that was his pleasure, and
the Constable answered that such a pleasure would seem to him all too
long in coming. So the secretary, in his presence, took a stick and
went out. When he came back and told him how he had beaten and kicked
and covered with mud and water the citizen of Setubal, Nun’ Alvarez
seemed to recover instantly and began to eat and drink.

To any other man, lord of half Portugal, it might perhaps have seemed
a little thing to have had a citizen beaten and rolled in a ditch, but
presently Nun’ Alvarez stopped eating, his eyes filled with tears, and
he began to wish he was dead. “Do you not see, Gil Airaz,” he said,
“that it would have been better for me to die than that you should have
done what you did to that good man?” “Now would to God I had no part of
all that land that God and my Lord the King have given me, so that this
thing were undone!”

When Gil Airaz saw that he was in earnest he told him how he had only
made a pretence of having beaten the man of Setubal and how all the
citizens had gone contentedly home. Nun’ Alvarez was so overjoyed
at this that he rose straightway from the table and went out to the
orchard and flowing streams. In three months, with the help of the
King’s physicians, he was well, and going alone with a page he set
to cutting the brushwood in front of him, and found his strength had
returned.

There is something infinitely touching in this story about a man who
was usually so calm and restrained that he might be in a passion of
anger and only show it--to those who knew him--by his smile, and
whose whole life was marked by exceptional strength of will. But his
old vigour returned, and very soon he was challenging the Master of
Santiago, begging him not to tire himself in advancing through so hot a
country, as he, “Nun’ Alvarez Pereira, Count of Barcellos and of Ourem
and of Arrayolos and Constable of my Lord the King of Portugal,” would
save him the trouble.

The great grief of the latter part of his life was the death of his
daughter Beatriz, Countess of Barcellos, and his life must have been
lonely despite the friendship of the King and especially of Prince
Duarte, heir to the throne. Before the expedition to Ceuta they went to
ask his advice under pretext of consulting him about some dogs for the
chase, so as to keep the secret of their enterprise. None better than
the King knew the value of Nun’ Alvarez’ opinion. He always seemed to
know precisely the right thing to be done and the right moment to do
it, was as far removed from boasting and vanity as from false humility,
and respected his own rights as well as those of others.

In charity he gave liberally, but never carelessly. Thus he yearly
bestowed the same quantity of cloth, but bestowed it in different
districts, and stored the corn from his estates, to be given away in
years of scarcity.

Before the end of the fourteenth century (1393) he divided most of
his land, that is a great part of Portugal, between his followers.
Large portions of Tras-os-Montes, Minho, and Alentejo belonged to him.
He was Count of Ourem, of Arrayolos and Barcellos, Lord of Braga,
Guimarães, Chaves, Montalegre, and nearly a score of other towns. His
policy of dividing these lands among his vassals under condition that
they should maintain certain forces in his and the King’s service,
proved unsatisfactory. Like the sated Marshals of Napoleon, they were
subsequently less willing to leave their estates and risk their persons
in battle.

The King, who had been too lavish in his gifts, proposed to buy back
his grants of land. Other nobles agreed to sell, but Nun’ Alvarez was
resolved not to brook the injustice, and, far from agreeing to the
proposal, departed to Alentejo and gathered his followers with a view
to leave Portugal, although, as he said, he would never serve any other
king.

King João, thoroughly alarmed, sent the Bishop of Evora, the Dean of
Coimbra and the Master of the Order of Avis post-haste after him. But
Nun’ Alvarez then, as always when he seemed to be acting rashly on
impulse, was carrying out a quick but well-reasoned decision, and was
only with difficulty persuaded to a compromise. It was finally agreed
that his vassals should be transferred to the King, while Nun’ Alvarez
was to retain in his own hands most of his territorial possessions.
Seven years after the victorious capture of Ceuta he again renounced
them.

He had always been a man of great piety; after one of his victories
he had gone barefoot in pilgrimage to Santa Maria de Assumar; he
had founded churches throughout the country, heard mass twice or
thrice daily, and would rise at midnight to pray the hours. But it
was probably the death of his only daughter that moved him to retire
to serve God in the monastery of Santa Maria do Carmo, which he had
founded in memory of his victory of Valverde. There, on August 15,
1423, he professed as Frei Nuno de Santa Maria, after giving away all
his lands and titles. Of his daughter’s three children, Isabel married
the Infante João, Affonso became Conde de Ourem, and, later, Marquez de
Valença, and Fernando, Conde de Arrayolos and, later, Duke of Braganza.

When Nun’ Alvarez, penniless, retired to his cell it was his purpose to
beg his daily bread in the streets of Lisbon, and he also intended to
end his days where he might be quite unknown; but Prince Duarte went to
see him at the Carmo and affectionately ordered him to accept a pension
from the King, a great part of which, however, he spent in charities.

In 1431, in his seventy-first year, and two years before his life-long
friend, King João, the greatest of all Portugal’s great men died. “God
grant him as much glory and honour as in this world was his,” says the
old chronicle.

Surely no truer man or more chivalrous knight ever donned helmet or
drew sword. Tradition says that the Lisbon people long assembled to
sing songs and witness many miracles at his grave. But his fittest and
most enduring monuments are the noble buildings of Carmo and Batalha,
and, above all, a free and united Portugal.


[Illustration: PRINCE HENRY THE NAVIGATOR.]




III

PRINCE HENRY THE NAVIGATOR

(1394-1460)

 Ca trabalho seria de se achar antre os vivos seu semelhante.--GOMEZ
 EANNEZ DE AZURARA, _Cronica de Guiné_.

 Mestre insigne de toda a arte militar.--D. FRANCISCO MANOEL DE MELLO.

 O homem a quem a Europa deve mais.--JOSÉ AGOSTINHO DE MACEDO, _Motim
 Literario_.


For some years before his death, Nun’ Alvarez might well rest satisfied
with the prosperity which largely by his own exertions had fallen
upon his country. Nor was it a careless or degenerate prosperity. The
five noble sons of King João I and his English wife, Queen Philippa,
daughter of “time-honoured Lancaster,” had grown to manhood, and the
time was pregnant with great deeds. If Duarte was perhaps Nun’ Alvarez’
favourite among the princes, he certainly must have discerned in his
younger brother his own successor in guiding the destinies of Portugal.
Although possibly less chivalrous than Nun’ Alvarez, Prince Henry
possessed his strong will and intensity of purpose, with a wider range
of vision. A Portuguese writer represents him living in retirement at
Sagres, his eyes fixed exclusively on Heaven; but Prince Henry believed
that he could best serve Heaven by bringing to success the earthly
affairs on which he had set his heart.

It was certainly with the keenness which marked the young Nun’ Alvarez
that Henrique, then twenty-one, embarked with his father, King João I,
and his brothers, Duarte and Pedro, in the expedition against Ceuta in
1415. He had his father’s promise that he should be the first to land,
and in the storming of the town he was ever in the thickest of the
fighting. The Moors defended the town obstinately, and a fresh danger
arose when the victorious Portuguese dispersed to plunder. Henry, with
a little band of seventeen followers, saved the situation against such
odds that news was at first brought to the King that his son was dead.
For his gallant behaviour on that day he was made Duke of Vizeu and
Lord of Covilhã, while his brother Pedro became Duke of Coimbra.

But Henry returned from North-West Africa with perhaps a still
greater prize--increased knowledge of the Dark Continent and a fixed
determination to explore further a land which he now knew to be no mere
sandy and unfertile desert. To this work he devoted the next forty-five
years, without a shadow of turning, since political events might hamper
but could not weaken his purpose, merely delaying the promised end.

It is often asked what was his object, as though the wish to win
fresh knowledge, to acquire new territory for his country, and glory
and riches, and to extend the Christian faith were unaccountable or
unworthy aims. Rather we cannot wonder that the discoveries became the
absorbing passion of his life, so that he has been blamed for his
lukewarm intervention in contemporary politics and his weak defence of
his brother, the Duke of Coimbra.

On the discoveries as Grand Master of the Order of Christ he spent its
princely revenues, and in 1418, retiring from the Court, he settled
on the Sacred Cape, or Sagres, now Cape St. Vincent. His palace and
observatory soon drew a village round it, known as Terça Naval, or
the Villa do Infante (Princestown). Here, as Governor of Algarve, he
spent the greater part of his life, fitting out ships in Lagos harbour,
welcoming travellers, poring over maps brought to him by Prince Pedro
and others from their travels, observing the heavens, and watching for
the return of his ships.

His keenness was not inconsistent with a certain shyness and reserve.
He was a student prince, but less literary and more scientific than his
brothers. All day, and often far into the night, he would be at work,
an energetic hermit such as the Middle Ages had not known. His eyes in
the intensity and even fierceness of their glance repelled the timid,
but they also had the far-away look as of one watching and dreaming,
while his firm lips and jaws were those of one planning and willing.
His iron will and self-discipline curbed his equally strong temper and
impatient eagerness, so that when most moved to anger he would merely
say, like an Irishman, “I leave you to God.”

Courageous and persistent, he prepared all his schemes with the utmost
thoroughness, and all the help that science could afford, and he
carried them out with unfaltering resolution. All through his life he
acted up to his French motto, _Talent de bien faire_, which we may
translate by the “love of useful glory” to which, according to the poet
Thomson, he roused mankind. And if we do not sit cowering before the
unknown on all sides it is to Prince Henry and a few men of similarly
keen intellect and stout will that we owe it.

It must not be thought that he met with no opposition, apart from
the great difficulties that naturally beset all discoverers and
innovators. On the one hand, the perils of navigating down the coast of
Africa were considered insurmountable, and, on the other, the gains to
be derived from it were held to be nugatory. It was not till the first
slaves and the first gold arrived that men began to realise thoroughly
that Prince Henry was something more than an empty dreamer. No one with
less faith, a faith based both on religion and science, would have
persevered, as Prince Henry persevered, in face of the slight support
at first given by public opinion and the slight success obtained.
But, although there were many disappointments and progress was slow,
the mysteries of the African coast did gradually recede before his
persistency, as year after year he sent out ships with definite
instructions based on his maps and scientific knowledge.

The death of King João I in 1433 did not seriously interfere with his
plans; his brother Duarte gave him every possible support, and the
expedition against Tangier in 1437 was not an interruption but rather
one aspect of his life-work. Indeed, he was the leading spirit of
the enterprise. He and his younger brother, Fernando, obtained from
King Duarte the consent for which they had ceased to hope from their
father; but Duarte at first, and Pedro throughout, were opposed to
the expedition. It set out in August, and the little army of some six
thousand men disembarked at Ceuta, and, without waiting for the ships
to return to Portugal for reinforcements, marched to attack Tangier.

Failing to take the place by storm, the princes settled down to
blockade it. The danger of such a course was obvious, but even when the
Moors, who trooped down from the hinterland, outnumbered the Christian
force by twenty to one they were driven back in a series of magnificent
attacks. But the Moorish host continued to grow by scores of thousands
daily, and in the second week of October it became apparent even to
the fiery heart of Prince Henry that he was embarked on a hopeless
enterprise.

The siege was raised and the small army attempted to regain their
ships. Henry with the cavalry protected their retreat. But the
cowardice of some, the treachery of others, and the overwhelming number
of the enemy proved too much for his splendid defence, and on October
15 he was forced to come to an agreement with the enemy. By this
capitulation the Portuguese were to be allowed to re-embark without
their arms, Ceuta, their twenty-two years’ possession, was to be given
up, and Prince Fernando, with certain other hostages, was to remain in
the hands of the enemy until the Portuguese should have evacuated the
town.

Prince Henry, in his despair, fell ill at Ceuta and afterwards retired
to Sagres. He would not give up Ceuta, and he could not save Fernando
otherwise. King Duarte, confronted by the same cruel alternative,
succumbed to grief and illness at Thomar in the following year.

To Henry’s sorrow for the death of one brother and the living death of
another--the tortures of Fernando’s captivity ended in a miserable
dungeon in 1443--was added the crushing of his hopes and projects. For
the new King was but a boy, and it needed no peculiar foresight to
prophesy impending trouble in Portugal. It required all Prince Henry’s
fortitude and faith to persevere, in loneliness and remorse. Prince
Pedro had strongly opposed the expedition: it was on Henry that its
failure rested. Nor was he one to wish to shirk responsibility, and
many an hour he must have spent brooding over the fatal effects of his
rashness.

Henry is too great a man to need to have his mistakes glossed over.
He had underestimated the difficulty of the enterprise, he had been
rash in advancing from Ceuta without awaiting reinforcements, he had
been rasher in not retiring after the first unsuccessful attempt to
scale the walls of Tangier. His object certainly had been a noble one,
based on no personal greed or ambition, and the results of his failure
were felt by none more than by himself. In the eyes of others his
magnificent courage and steadfast retreat placed him even higher than
before.

Fortunately for him, there was plenty of work ready to his hand, for,
although he did not personally accompany the ships of exploration,
he scientifically worked out their instructions, equipped them, and
followed their progress on his maps. Perhaps a certain estrangement
between Pedro and Henry was natural after 1437; Henry, at least,
did not very actively support his brother in his quarrel with the
Queen-Regent, and failed to stand by him later when he had resigned his
Regency and was venomously attacked and slandered by his enemies before
his weak son-in-law, King Affonso V. When the matter came to open
conflict Pedro, with his small band of followers, could not hope for
victory, and again Henry did not resolutely intervene. Pedro’s tragic
death at Alfarrobeira in 1449 cannot have diminished Henry’s remorse
for the death of Duarte and Fernando eleven and six years earlier.

Meanwhile, his austere devotion to the work of discovery bore
increasing fruit, and before he died the rich islands of the Azores,
Madeira, the Canaries, and Cape Verde were discovered, and the coast of
Africa explored as far as Sierra Leone, which was reached by the famous
Venetian, Luigi Cadamosto, in the service of Prince Henry, nearly a
quarter of a century after Gil Eannez had rounded Cape Bojador in 1434.
The Infante himself had lost little of his energy, and although nearly
sixty-five, accompanied his nephew Affonso V in the expedition against
Morocco in 1558, and took a prominent part in the siege and capture of
Alcacer.

The last two years of his life were spent at Sagres. In September 1460
he disposed of certain of his revenues, potential rather than actual,
to the Order of Christ and to the State, which had hitherto recognised
his right to receive the profits of the discoveries as it had allowed
him to bear its burden. The burden to the day of his death was far
greater than the profits. Yet he must have realised that his life’s
purpose was attained, and that the rest was but a matter of time, as
surely as though he had planted an orange-tree and died when it was
covered with blossom. His body was taken to Batalha, and, if it was
not to remain on Cape St. Vincent looking southwards over the sea
to Africa, no worthier resting-place could be found for it than the
splendid church built to commemorate the victory of his father and of
his friend Nun’ Alvarez. Prince Henry spent himself, his time, and
his revenues without stint in the service of a great idea and a high
ambition. Nun’ Alvarez had worked for the independence of Portugal;
Prince Henry left it well on the road to an imperishable glory.

A generation later, when the full effects of his life’s work were
manifest, his countrymen and the world recognised in this strong,
tenacious ascetic, with his burning zeal for God and country, his
fearlessness and unwavering devotion, the inspirer and origin of
Portugal’s new greatness.

[Illustration: VASCO DA GAMA]




IV

VASCO DA GAMA

(1460?-1524)

 O qual Vasco da Gama era homem prudente e de bom saber e de grande
 animo para todo bom feito.--GASPAR CORREA, _Lendas da India_.


King João II pressed on vigorously with the discovery of the west
coast of Africa. The year of his accession was not ended before Diogo
de Azambuja set out with ten ships (1481), and after his return the
King assumed the title of “Lord of Guinea.” Diogo Cam in 1484 and
1485 carried the discovery still further, past the River of Crabs
(Cameroons), past Congo and Angola to Walvisch Bay, and two years later
Bartholomeu Diaz rounded the Cape, and with that the problem of the
sea-route to India was practically solved, so that King John died
(October 1495) in sight of the promised land. Indeed, the departure of
the ships which Vasco de Gama was destined to command was only delayed
by the King’s death. He had given “orders for such wood to be cut in
wood and forest as the carpenters and builders should desire, and this
was brought to Lisbon, where at once three small ships were begun.”

In appointing Vasco da Gama, a knight of his household, to the command
King Manoel showed that he knew the value of the men who had grown up
in the stern school of João II. The Gamas were a distinguished family
of the south of Portugal; they had already rendered good service to the
State--Vasco himself may have had a part in the work of discovering the
coast of Africa--and if they were at times quarrelsome and unruly their
loyalty and courage were never in doubt. In 1497 the meekest of them,
Paulo, Vasco’s eldest brother, was in trouble for having wounded a
judge at Setubal,[5] and received the King’s pardon before he sailed as
captain of one of the ships.

Vasco, a man of medium height and knightly bearing, was bold and
daring in enterprise, patient and determined in adversity, but harsher
and more irascible than his brother. It is a curious instance of the
continuous if often slight connection between the two nations of
seafarers, the English and the Portuguese, that Vasco da Gama had
English blood in his veins. The name of his mother, Isabel Sodré, which
survives in Lisbon’s _Caes do Sodré_, was a corruption of Sudley, her
grandfather having been Frederick Sudley, of the family of the Earls of
Hereford. Vasco was born probably in 1460, in the little sea-town of
Sines, of which his father was _Alcaide Môr_, and in honour of which
Vasco later is said to have been in the habit of firing a salute as he
passed.

The third captain appointed by King Manoel was Nicolao Coelho.

The three ships, of about a hundred tons, _São Gabriel_ (Vasco da
Gama), _São Raphael_ (Paulo da Gama), and _São Miguel_[6] (Nicolao
Coelho), after solemn procession and leave-taking of the King, on July
8, 1497, sailed down the Tagus from Belem and rounded Cape Espichel to
the south. The crews averaged little over fifty men, being perhaps 170
in all, including six convicts in each ship to be cast ashore in order
to spy out the land at different points. Bartholomeu Diaz, bound for
the fortress of São Jorge da Mina, accompanied them as far as the Cape
Verde Islands.

In November they reached the bay of St. Helena where Vasco da Gama was
slightly wounded in an affray with the natives. Hitherto their voyage
had been prosperous; but they encountered heavy storms both before and
after rounding the Cape of Good Hope, and it required all Vasco’s
resolution and Paulo’s persuasiveness to keep the crews to their
voyage. The mutinous crew of the _São Gabriel_ had counted without its
host, and found Gama little less formidable than the storms of these
unknown seas. Not if he were confronted with a hundred deaths, he said,
and not if the ships were all filled with gold, would he go back a
single yard; but he did not wholly disregard the murmurings of the men,
for he clapped the mate and pilot of his ship in irons, to hold them as
hostages, and, as they were the only persons who knew anything of the
art of navigation, the crew was effectually cowed.

At Christmas they reached the land which to this day bears the
Portuguese name, Natal, of the time of its discovery. Passing slowly
north along the coast, they arrived towards the end of January at the
Zambezi River, and in this shelter made a stay of several weeks; but
scurvy among the crew forced them again to sea, and in the beginning of
March they reached Mozambique. Here, as at Mombasa a month later, the
natives received them with every appearance of friendship, but made a
treacherous if rather courageous attempt to seize their ships. The King
of Melinde, a little further north, was friendly and loyal, and here
the Portuguese obtained pilots for the voyage to India.

The passage lasted less than a month, and on May 18 they sighted
Asia, the end and object of their enterprise, and came to anchor
off Calicut on the 21st. Calicut was a few miles distant, and Vasco
da Gama, although implored by his brother not to risk his person
by disembarking, started on the overland journey. It required some
courage, for among the native sightseers who crowded round the
Portuguese there were not a few armed and covertly hostile Moors.

In the minds of the Portuguese, the East had long been connected with
the empire of the Christian Prester John, the half mythical ruler of
Abyssinia, and they expected to find the majority of the natives
Christians. Accordingly they were easily duped here (as indeed they
had been in Africa) and Vasco da Gama and his companions on the way
to Calicut worshipped in a Hindu pagoda. The images on the walls
were unlike those of the saints to which they had been accustomed in
Portugal. Some of them had four arms, the teeth of others protruded a
whole inch from their mouths, and their faces were hideous as the faces
of devils. Like Little Red Ridinghood, one of the Portuguese, João de
Sá, was in the most serious doubt when he saw these figures, and, as he
knelt down, in order to avoid any mistake, he said aloud “If this is a
devil I worship the true God.” And Vasco da Gama looked across at him
and smiled.

 A che guardando il suo duca sorrise.

This does not tally well with the character of the disciplinarian,
despotic Gama, as it is usually represented. But these qualities
developed later.

The Portuguese were as ignorant about the King of the country as about
its gods. For the Samuri of Calicut was no simple King of Melinde, but
a great potentate accustomed to traders and to foreign civilisations.
It was not without difficulty that Gama obtained an interview, and
when he succeeded, the King, all aglow with jewellery, seated chewing
betel, a page on either side, and his chief Brahman behind his chair,
was fully a match for the haughty Gama. From one of his bracelets
gleamed a priceless stone of a thumb’s thickness, his necklace was of
pearls almost of the size of small acorns, and from a gold chain hung
a heart-shaped jewel surrounded by pearls and covered with rubies,
and in the centre a great green stone, an emerald, of the size of a
large bean, belonging to the ancient treasure of the Kings of Calicut.
His golden trumpets were longer by a third than those of the King of
Portugal.

It appears that the Portuguese had brought no present worthy of
so great a monarch. The same historian, Correa, who thus vividly
describes the King’s appearance, also gives a detailed account of the
present. It consisted, he says, of “a very delicate piece of scarlet,
and a piece of crimson velvet, and a piece of yellow satin and a chair
richly upholstered with brocade, with silver-gilt nails, and a cushion
of crimson satin with tassels of gold thread, and another cushion of
red satin for the feet, and a very richly wrought gilt ewer and basin,
and a large and very beautiful gilt mirror and fifty red caps with
buttons and veils of crimson silk and gold thread upon them, and fifty
gilt sheaths of Flemish knives, which had been inlaid in Lisbon with
ivory.”

The King should have been satisfied, but probably this present, if it
ever existed, had dwindled in gifts to natives of Africa on the way.
The question in the King’s mind was that asked once of Telemachus: Had
they come as peaceful traders, or were they pirates?

Vasco da Gama, faced by a reception so courteous yet so insulting,
maintained a proud, serene attitude, as he had when on his way to the
palace--he is represented advancing slowly, waiting for the crowds
to be cleared out of his way--and as he did later when placed under
arrest by the Catual, or Governor of the city. By his resolution during
the dangers and obstacles of the voyage and by his calm behaviour in
Calicut he justified the King’s choice and his subsequent fame.

The Samuri himself was far more favourably inclined to the new-comers
than were the Moors, who naturally resented the appearance of other
traders. The Portuguese were greatly helped throughout by a Mohammedan
who had learnt Spanish at Tunis, but, although Gama brought home
specimens of pepper, ginger, cloves, musk, benjamin, and other spices
as well as pearls and rubies, his visit to Calicut, which ended with
the high-handed measure of seizing and carrying off several natives,
was unsuccessful, since it resulted in no treaty of friendship or
commerce.

At the end of August they started on the homeward voyage, but remained
for some time off the coast of India, and in the Indian Ocean lay
becalmed for many days, during which the crew again suffered terribly
from scurvy, a considerable number dying. The remnant of the crews
struggled on in their three ships towards Portugal; at Cabo Verde,
Coelho separated from the others and carried the news to King Manoel
(July 1499). Paulo da Gama was worn out by anxiety and exertions, and
Vasco sailed with him north-west to the Azores, where, in the island of
Terceira, Paulo died. It was not till the end of the summer that Vasco
da Gama reached the Tagus.

It is said--although Coelho’s earlier arrival contradicts the
story--that a Terceira trader, Arthur Rodriguez, about to sail from his
island to Algarve, saw two ships at anchor and asked whence they were.
“From India,” came the answer. At these magic words he set sail, not,
however, to Algarve, but due East, and in four days cast anchor in the
harbour of Cascaes. The King was at Sintra, and had just sat down to
supper when Rodriguez hurried in with the good news.

When the few survivors[7] arrived at Lisbon (September 1499) they
were given a splendid reception, and Vasco da Gama was never able
to complain that his services went unrewarded. He was granted the
coveted title of Dom, and became hereditary Admiral of India, while
his pensions (300,000 réis a year) and facilities of trade with India
made him one of the richest men in the realm. So powerful did he become
in Sines that the Order of Santiago interfered, with the result that
Gama was obliged to leave his native town and in 1507 went to live at
Evora.[8] In November 1519 the Duke James of Braganza sold him the town
of Vidigueira, of which Gama became first Count.

A large part of his triumph belonged to Prince Henry, to King João II,
and to Bartholomeu Diaz, who was drowned in the following year off the
Cape which he had been the first to round.

King Manoel, overjoyed at having attained the goal of nearly a
century’s constant striving, now styled himself not only King
of Portugal and the Algarves and Lord of Guinea but Lord of the
Navigation, Conquest, and Commerce of Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, and
India; he sent word of the discovery to the Pope and all the princes
of Christendom; and at Belem, on the right bank of the Tagus, whence
the discoverers had set sail over two years before, he built the fine
monastery of São Jeronimo, where now are the tombs of the King himself,
of Dom Vasco, who brought him all this glory, and of Camões, who
celebrated it in deathless verse.

The building stands in strange contrast to that of Batalha, where
Prince Henry the Navigator lies buried. The pure Gothic of Batalha,
with its magnificent plain pillars and soaring arches, spells heroic
aspiration; the Manueline of Belem in its exuberance and rich profusion
of detail bears traces of satisfied accomplishment, as though Portugal
might now throw simplicity and austere endeavour to the winds.

Dom Vasco da Gama in February 1502 set sail a second time for India,
and returned in September 1303 with the first tribute of gold from
India. “As the King was then at Lisbon, Dom Vasco, when he went to see
him, took the tribute which he had received from the King of Quiloa[9].
A nobleman in plain doublet with uncovered head went before the Admiral
on horseback in great solemnity, carrying the gold in a large basin of
silver, to the sound of drums and trumpets, and in company of all the
gentlemen of the Court. And the King ordered a monstrance to be wrought
of it, as rich in workmanship as in weight, and offered it to Our Lady
of Bethlehem as first fruits of those victories of the East.”

The death of Paulo da Gama seems to have killed the gentler strain
in Vasco’s nature, and his many honours, titles, and estates rendered
him more overbearing. It was on his second voyage to India, in October
1502, that he blew up a peaceful trading ship from Mecca with 380 (or
by another account, 240) men on board, besides many women and children,
after relieving it of all gold and merchandise. As to his overweening
pride, he is said to have signed himself Count in a letter to the King
before the title had been actually conferred.

Despite the crying need for a strong man to restore discipline in India
after Albuquerque’s death, King Manoel did not send Dom Vasco out as
Governor, and it was only in the reign of King João III, and when
Gama was over sixty, that he left Lisbon, in April 1524, as Viceroy
of India, with his sons Estevão and Paulo and a force of 3,000 men.
He reached Goa in September and presently proceeded to Cochin. He
was resolved to bring some measure of order and justice out of the
confusion and corruption of India; and whereas most other Governors on
their arrival were too busily occupied in enriching themselves to pay
careful attention to other matters, Gama bent his whole will to effect
reforms.

The reforms were salutary, but they filled native and Portuguese alike
with consternation and were decreed in a harsh, unconciliatory spirit.
Gama came into conflict with the outgoing Governor, Dom Duarte de
Meneses, and only reduced him to obedience by giving orders to bombard
him in his ship.

The first three months of Gama’s vice-royalty proved that the task of
reforming the rule of the Portuguese in India was work for a younger
man, and on Christmas Day 1524, to the relief of the self-seekers,
to the grief of those who cared for the future of their country, Dom
Vasco da Gama died, exactly twenty-seven years after the sight of Natal
had given him the first real promise of success in his earlier great
adventure.


FOOTNOTES:

[5] This may have been the occasion on which Vasco da Gama, closely
wrapped in his _capa_, one night in the streets of Setubal refused to
reveal his identity to the Alcaide going his rounds, declaring that he
was no _malfeitor_. The Alcaide’s attempt to arrest him failed.

[6] Also apparently called _Berrio_, after the pilot from whom it was
bought (?). Since Berrio = New (Basque _berri_) it was an appropriate
name for a ship going to the discovery of _mares nunca dantes
navegados_.

[7] It is said that only 55 out of the original 170 returned.

[8] This apparently continued to be his home for twelve years, since a
document of November 7, 1519, has “in the city of Evora in the house
in which now lives the magnificent Lord Dom Vasco da Gama, Admiral of
India.”

[9] Now Kilwa; soon, perhaps, Quiloa again.




V

DUARTE PACHECO PEREIRA

(1465?-1533?)

  O gram Pacheco, Achilles lusitano.

  LUIS DE CAMÕES, _Os Lusiadas_.

  Diversas et incredibiles victorias obtinens.

  DAMIÃO DE GOES, _Hispania_.


One of the captains who sailed from Lisbon with the cousins Albuquerque
in 1503 was Duarte Pacheco Pereira. Like the great Affonso de
Albuquerque with whom he sailed, he was still unknown to fame. He
may have been between thirty-five and forty years of age, but his
subsequent glory has thrown no light for us on his earlier years; and
beyond the fact that he was born at Lisbon, that he was a knight of
the King’s household, and that under João II he was employed in the
discovery of the west coast of Africa, we have to be content with
silence.

Five years had passed since the Portuguese had first reached India, and
instead of peaceful trade there was war between the King of Calicut and
the Portuguese, and hostilities between Cochin and Calicut by reason
of the King of Cochin’s friendship with the new-comers. The King of
Cochin, indeed, had been uniformly loyal to the Portuguese and had
shown conspicuous firmness of purpose, and to Cochin the Albuquerques
directed their course.

It was in an expedition against one of the King of Cochin’s enemies,
the Lord of Repelim (Eddapalli), that Pacheco first signalised himself
for dashing bravery and learnt what daring and energy could do against
a numerous but ill-equipped and undisciplined enemy. As he returned
in four boats at ten o’clock one night from a long day’s victorious
expedition against six or seven thousand natives he found his progress
blocked by thirty-four ships chained to one another. After encouraging
his men by a stirring speech he locked his own boats together and
forced his way through, and then immediately went about so as to be
able to stop the enemy’s pursuit with his artillery. A fierce combat
ensued, but Pacheco had completed his victory before the Albuquerques
could come to his assistance.

The King of Cochin was so greatly impressed by this exploit that he
henceforth held Pacheco in the highest esteem. He little knew at the
time how intimately their fortunes were to be linked. Before Affonso
and Francisco de Albuquerque left for home it was known that the King
(the Samuri) of Calicut was about to attack Cochin with his entire
forces by land and sea. None of the Portuguese captains evinced any
alacrity to be left behind in its defence, and when Pacheco accepted
with a good will, but “rather to serve God and the King than for any
hope of profit,” those who knew how great was the might of Calicut
said: “God have mercy on Duarte Pacheco and those who remain with
him,” scarcely expecting to set eyes on him again. As it proved it was
Francisco de Albuquerque who perished, on his way home, while Pacheco
died many years later, in peace and on dry land.

Whatever Pacheco’s thoughts may have been at the prospect before him,
he knew that to instil confidence into his men was half the battle;
he said little, but showed by his demeanour that he was perfectly
satisfied, and asked for not a single man beyond those whom the
Albuquerques had found possible to leave him. Thus he remained alone in
India, still an unknown country to the Portuguese, with his own ship
and three even smaller vessels, and, in all, ninety men.

It was little wonder that even the faithful and resolute King of Cochin
began to despair when it was known that the host, or horde, from
Calicut consisted of 60,000 men. He himself could provide about half
that number, but of these three-quarters were actively or passively
hostile. The Moors, moreover, who supplied Cochin with provisions were
minded to abandon the city, and would have done so had not Pacheco
intervened.

He at first determined to hang the ring-leader in this treachery, but
the King declared that, should he do so, the rest would rise in mutiny,
and he accordingly assembled the “honest merchants,” and addressed
them in a speech of such vigour that for the moment he had no further
trouble from the Moors. Purple with rage and speaking so loud that he
seemed to be actually fighting, he offered them his friendship, but
should they thwart him he promised to be a crueller enemy to them than
any King of Calicut. Their respect for Pacheco was further increased
by his astonishing energy, for, after working all day at preparations
against the coming invasion, he spent the nights in forays into the
Repelim country.

Pacheco’s task was to defend the city of Cochin, and the Portuguese
fort recently built by the Albuquerques. The territory of Cochin
was separated from that of Repelim by salt-water channels, and the
preparations of the Portuguese were directed to the defence of the
principal ford, which was only passable at low tide, with deeper water
at each end. With this object stakes were made ready to be driven in
all along the ford in a serried stockade. By the time the King of
Calicut reached Repelim, Pacheco had put a salutary fear into the
hearts of the citizens of Cochin, so that when the news of his arrival
came their first impulse to abandon the city was immediately checked.

The better to inspire them with his own fearlessness, he made his usual
night expedition into Repelim and set fire to one of the villages.
He experienced some difficulty in returning, and five of his men
were wounded, but when the King of Cochin expostulated against this
foolhardiness he merely laughed and said that all he wished for was
that the King of Calicut should advance to attack him.

The first attack at the ford occurred on the last day of March 1504
(Palm Sunday), and the period that followed may well claim to be one
of the most brilliant Hundred Days in history. The enemy on this Palm
Sunday, relying on their overwhelming numbers, crowded down to the ford
at low tide, but the sharp stockade confronted them and the artillery
from the boats stationed in the deep water on both sides of the
stockade cut them down. Their own “cannon” were not very formidable,
for we are told that they did not propel their projectiles with greater
violence than that with which one might throw a stone, and at the end
of the day the Portuguese had but a few injured and none killed. Their
danger was nevertheless great, for although the enemy had suffered
considerably in this first assault they were so numerous that they
could continually renew the attack, and sleepless vigilance, with
intervals of terrific exertion, was necessary to defeat them.

But Pacheco had succeeded in imparting something of his own spirit
to his men. Undeterred by the flight of the Nairs who should have
supported him, he took advantage with his usual energy of the
breathing-space secured by this first victory, ordered his men to make
a show of revelry at intervals during the following night in order to
impress the enemy, and next day with forty men set out and burnt a
village. The enemy’s attacks were repeated on Good Friday and Easter
Sunday and Easter Tuesday, and in the intervals of victory Pacheco kept
on burning villages, to the delight of those in Cochin.

The endurance of the defenders was tested to the utmost when the
King of Calicut attacked on the same day in two places, at the ford
and in a deep water channel. He seems to have made a mistake in not
waiting to attack with his fleet until low tide enabled the infantry
simultaneously to assault the ford, or, at least, the plan did not work
out well, and Pacheco was able to deal first with the numerous fleet of
boats, said to have been two hundred and fifty in number.

The four little Portuguese ships seemed almost lost in the multitude
of the enemy. The darts and arrows, says one of the early Portuguese
historians, were in such quantity that they cast a shadow over the
ships, and so loud were the shouts and cries that it seemed to be the
end of the world. Again and again the enemy’s boats, chained together,
came on to the attack, but they never succeeded in boarding the
Portuguese _caravelas_, although many of the Portuguese were wounded.

Meanwhile twelve thousand infantry had advanced against the ford.
Message after message came to Pacheco for help, but the tide was still
running out and he contented himself with answering that he was still
engaged with the fleet but that this was “not the day of the King of
Calicut.” At the turn of the tide, after having dealt faithfully with
the fleet of the enemy’s boats, he went; but the water was still too
shallow when he approached the ford and the ships grounded. He was
able, however, to work great havoc with his artillery among the many
thousands of assailants, although he could not come up to fight with
them at close quarters.

For a long hour the low water at the ford gave every advantage to the
enemy. Crowds of them surrounded the stranded ships, thousands rushed
forward to attack the ford. The water was tinged with red. And still
the ships refused to move. At last they floated, and as the tide rose
the danger of the attack grew less and less, till at dusk it ceased
entirely.

Another most formidable battle was fought at the beginning of May when
the King of Calicut in person attacked the ford. The Nairs from Cochin
who were to have defended the stockade deserted their post, many of the
enemy actually succeeded in crossing, and it was only by unparalleled
exertions that Pacheco, after being retained with his ship by the low
water, was able to hurl them back with great loss. A cannon-shot aimed
at the King of Calicut, which succeeded in killing several persons
near him, profoundly discouraged him in what began to seem a hopeless
enterprise, instead of child’s play as at first.

But the strain on Pacheco was not relaxed, and he spent night and day
watching and fighting. One Sunday as he sat at his midday meal in
his caravel after keeping watch all night, the look-out man sighted
eighteen hostile craft approaching. He determined to attack, but when
he arrived in mid-stream another fleet of sixteen, and then eighteen
more, darted out suddenly from behind a promontory, and it proved no
simple affair to beat them off.

The King of Cochin came up in time to witness Pacheco’s victory, and
after congratulating him reproached him for having exposed himself
alone to such a risk. Pacheco did not think it advisable to tell the
King that he had attacked in the belief that the enemy were only a
third of their real number, and his prestige with the natives was still
further enhanced.

The King of Calicut was in despair, and his forces were already reduced
from 60,000 to 40,000 men by battle and cholera, when a Moor of
Repelim invented a scheme which put new heart into the King and seemed
to give certain promise of capturing the Portuguese ships and all the
Portuguese in them. The device resembled that of moving towers built
to the height of the walls of a besieged town. Two boats were lashed
together to support a square wooden tower capable of holding some forty
men.

Pacheco had spies in the enemy’s camp who warned him of the new danger,
but the information was also divulged in Cochin, to the dismay of the
King and his subjects. The King paid Pacheco a visit, and, although
he was received on board with dance and song, besought him with tears
in his eyes to save himself by flight since further resistance was
useless, and when he left bade him farewell as for the last time.

To embolden the natives, Pacheco declared that he intended to defeat
the enemy now as on previous occasions, and asked them if he had ever
failed to keep his word. The further to encourage them, he erected
a great pointed stake on which to “spit the King of Calicut.” He did
not neglect more practical measures, for he raised the prows of his
vessels by means of wooden structures high enough to dominate the
enemy’s castles, and he put together a boom and fixed it by means of
six anchors a stone’s throw in front of his ships.

About two hours after midnight on Ascension Day a few shots announced
that the enemy were in motion. Pacheco landed, and after harrying
the advancing infantry returned to his ships at dawn in readiness to
receive the approaching fleet. At first the Portuguese artillery seemed
to make no impression on the strongly built tower that confronted them,
and for a short time it seemed that the enemy must be victorious.
“Lord, visit not my sins upon me now!” was Pacheco’s despairing cry.
But at last one of the towers came crashing down and Pacheco knelt on
deck and gave thanks to God, for the destruction of the rest was now
only a matter of time. The fighting lasted till dusk fell. So complete
was the discomfiture of the enemy and so miraculous seemed the escape
of the handful of Portuguese that the natives of Cochin lost all
fear of Calicut, and the Portuguese in India acquired far and wide a
reputation for invincible prowess.

The King of Calicut now had serious thoughts of giving over the war,
but two Italians, Milanese, persuaded him to attempt a night attack.
The plan was for the Prince of Repelim to advance with a large force,
and when he had engaged the enemy certain Nairs, posted in palm-trees,
were to raise fire-signals for the King of Calicut to follow with the
second army.

Unfortunately for them, Pacheco had wind of the arrangement and, aware
of his great danger, resolved to save the Nairs their trouble. He
accordingly set friendly Nairs in palm-trees, and as soon as the first
army started they gave the fire signal. The King of Calicut hurried
forward, but in the darkness either army mistook the other for an
ambush of natives from Cochin, and a long, fierce battle followed
between them, while Pacheco listened to the uproar but awaited the
enemy in vain. At dawn the two hostile armies found out their mistake
and retired in horror and dismay, while Pacheco, like some great
gloating demon, appeared in the increasing light to add to their
confusion with his artillery.

This was the last serious attack, and one by one the lords and princes
opposed to him came to terms with Pacheco. By boundless energy,
complete fearlessness, bluff, and the power of inspiring men at will
with fear or with confidence and devotion, Pacheco had achieved this
amazing triumph, which certainly had far-reaching effects on Portuguese
rule in India.

The King of Cochin lacked Pacheco’s imposing personality, but he was
affectionate and reliable throughout, bidding his subjects obey Pacheco
as they would his own person, and this despite the fact that Pacheco’s
behaviour was often very disconcerting. More than once he all but
hanged some treacherous Moors, although the King had warned him that
this would entail the cutting off of provisions from Cochin.

On another occasion a body of hostile Nairs made a surprise attack on
the island of Cochin, but were beaten off by the workers in the rice
swamps with their rustic weapons. Their victory was the easier because
a Nair considered himself polluted if one of these low-caste peasants
approached him.

Pacheco, delighted at the victory of these humble workmen, and mindful
moreover of more than one desertion of Nairs at difficult moments,
suggested that the King should make Nairs of these men, in the belief
apparently that the caste system could be brushed aside or altered at
will.[10] It was only after heated and repeated argument that the King
was able to persuade him that the thing he asked was impossible. The
heroic labourers were, however, permitted to bear arms and to approach
Nairs in future.

For himself Pacheco refused the King’s spices and other gifts,
aware that he could ill afford them, and accepted only the strange
coat-of-arms that the King bestowed on him--five crowns of gold on a
crimson ground--emblem of the much blood he had shed in his victory
over five kings--surrounded by eight green castles on blue and white.

At the beginning of the year 1505 he set out for home, to the sorrow
of the King of Cochin, and in the summer arrived at Lisbon. He was
received with great honour; on the Thursday after his arrival he walked
with the King in solemn procession from the Cathedral to the Convent of
São Domingos. The Bishop of Vizeu preached, exalting Pacheco’s heroic
deeds, and similar services were held throughout Portugal. News of his
exploits were sent to the Pope and to the Kings of Christendom.

Pacheco received a yearly pension of 50,000 réis, a considerable sum in
those days,[11] and other gifts and favours, and he married D. Antonia
de Albuquerque, daughter of one of King Manoel’s secretaries. Better
still, he received further employment from the King, being entrusted
with the survey of the coast of South-East Africa.

Already in 1505 he was at work on his _Esmeraldo de Situ Orbis_,
which had to wait nearly four centuries for a publisher. He was more
accustomed to hold the sword than the pen, but his book contains much
of interest and affords occasional insight into the character of its
author. Thus he says--and the philosophic tone of the words is of
interest in view of the neglect and poverty into which he is said to
have fallen in his last years: “No one is content with his possessions,
and in the end eight feet of earth suffice us and there ends and is
consumed the vanity of our high thoughts,” and “Virtuous men who love
God and are of clean heart and uncovetous are never forsaken of the
grace of the Holy Spirit.”

He dwells more than once on the iniquity of oblivion wrought by time:
“Difference of ages and length of time hide the knowledge of things
and render them forgotten.” His descriptions are clearly those of
an eyewitness, as that of “a little river which flows from the top
of the mountains to the sea through reeds and mint and rushes and
wild-olives.” He praises Prince Henry the Navigator and King João II,
whose deeds are worthy to be told “by the ancient fathers of eloquence
and learning,” and it was in gratitude to them, a gratitude which
posterity shares, that he wrote: “Experience causes us to live free
of the false abuses and fables that some of the ancient cosmographers
recorded.”

Although the great events of India under the rule of Albuquerque may
have obscured the deeds of Pacheco, he was evidently not forgotten,
for in January 1509 he was sent with several ships against the French
pirate Mondragon and defeated and captured him off Cape Finisterre, and
probably about the year 1520 he was appointed Governor of the fort of
São Jorge de Mina, a coveted post on the west coast of Africa.

Tradition has it that he came home in irons, and he may have been the
victim of one of those accusations by subordinates which were becoming
so common in the Portuguese overseas possessions. Pacheco had shown of
old that he was one of those whom he calls _inimigos da cobiça_, with
thoughts set on higher things than gold. But a new king was on the
throne, who was but two years old when Pacheco was winning immortal
renown for the Portuguese in India, and it seems to have been the
general feeling that he was unfairly treated. Camões speaks of his
“harsh and unjust reward.”

It appears that he continued to receive his pension, yet he is said to
have died, about the year 1530, in extreme penury. We may be sure at
least that his heart did not quail before poverty any more than it had
before the countless host of Calicut. The recollection of his wiles and
devices during those hundred days at Cochin must have been a powerful
antidote to neglect and old age. “The thought of what he had done would
prove music to him at midnight.”

A few, no doubt, of the heroic ninety on whose behalf Pacheco wrote to
the King, recalling their services, survived, and they might discuss
the apparent miracle of their famous victory, and, in Pacheco’s words,
“the multitude of things in the very wealthy kingdoms of India,” glad
at heart the while to be at home under the more temperate sun of
Portugal and to rind their “eight feet of earth” in their own soil.


FOOTNOTES:

[10] “The nobles,” says Correa, “are called Nairs, and are men devoted
to war.” The peasants “are so accursed that if they go along a road
they must go shouting, lest Nairs should meet and kill them, for they
may not carry arms, whereas the Nairs are always armed. And if as they
go shouting a Nair answers they scuttle away into the wilds far from
the road.”

[11] The poet Luis de Camões, after his return from the East, supported
life on less than a third of that amount.


[Illustration: AFFONSO DE ALBUQUERQUE.

From Gaspar Correa, _Lendas da India_, frontispiece to vol. ii. pt. 1.]




VI

AFFONSO DE ALBUQUERQUE

(1462?-1515)

 Aquelle invencivel e espantoso capitão Affonso de Albuquerque.--HEITOR
 PINTO, _Imagem da Vida Christam_.

 O sem segundo Affonso de Albuquerque, honra de todos os advertidos
 e scientes capitães que teve o mundo.--JOÃO RIBEIRO, _Fatalidade
 historica da Ilha de Ceilão_.

 Albuquerque terribil, Castro forte.--CAMÕES, _Os Lusiadas_.


Had Affonso de Albuquerque died five or six years before he did the
world would never have realised that it had lost one of the greatest
men of all nations and ages. Born of an ancient family[12] about the
year 1460,[13] Albuquerque had in 1514 seen thirty-eight years’
service. He won the regard of Prince João in the campaign against Spain
in which that prince saved his father from irretrievable defeat, and he
became his equerry when he had succeeded to the throne as João II. He
also served with distinction in Africa.

It was in 1503, when he was over forty, that he first went to India. In
April of that year he sailed with his cousin Francisco de Albuquerque
in command of six ships, the chief object of the expedition being to
establish the friendship existing between the King of Cochin and the
Portuguese and to build a fort at Cochin. Albuquerque made no long stay
in India, and in July of the following year was back in Lisbon. But
he remained long enough to see the vast possibilities there of failure
or success for Portugal, and when, two years later, he again went out,
although he sailed as the subordinate of Tristão da Cunha, it was on
the understanding that he should soon obtain independent command and
with the provisional appointment as Governor of India in his pocket.

Smooth co-operation with other officials was not Albuquerque’s
strong point, and he felt no doubt that if he was to serve his King
and country as he would wish he must be able to act freely. It is
significant of his commanding personality that during his two years’
presence at Court he succeeded in imposing his views. In his absence
later his enemies were often able to tie him hand and foot even though
he was Governor of India.

There were two opposed policies. Hitherto the Portuguese in India had
been confined to the sea, and many considered that this situation
should continue. In a sense they were right, since it was obviously
impossible in so vast an empire to conquer and hold large tracts of
land. But Albuquerque considered that this floating empire should
be nailed down at cardinal points by capturing important towns and
building strong forts, and it was with this purpose that he went out to
India.

In the summer of 1507 he separated, according to his instructions, from
Tristão da Cunha, and when the latter returned to Portugal with the
rest of the fleet Albuquerque with his six ships remained in India. Of
these ships he has left a vivid description: there were no provisions,
the lances and other arms were few and rotten, with great scarcity of
cables, sails, and rigging; the powder was all wet, of bombardiers
there were but few, of carpenters one or two, and a hundred and fifty
men were dying of disease.

Even so he set to work to strike terror into the Moors and hammer the
Portuguese Empire into shape. Coasting down Arabia he sacked various
cities, spreading desolation with fire and sword and mercilessly
mutilating the Moors who surrendered. The poet Antonio Ferreira called
Albuquerque “clement.” It is not a clemency that we would wish to
encounter in ordinary life, and even among his contemporaries some
condemned his cruelty. Bishop Osorio, for instance, considered it as
unworthy of so great a man: _illius rebus gestis indignum_.

But although Albuquerque could be harsh and grim enough (his suggestion
to King Manoel that Spanish and Portuguese Jews in India should be
extinguished one by one is most sinister), and was quick to anger and
a stern disciplinarian, he had no delight in cruelty for cruelty’s
sake. He wished to reduce the Moors throughout India to subjection, and
considered that such acts would best spread the terror of his name and
conceal the difficulties of his position. He would have been the first
to admit that his policy in this respect was a sign of weakness.

Albuquerque’s first great achievement was the bombardment and capture
of the important city of Ormuz, at the entrance of the Persian
Gulf, and in October he set about building a fortress. Milton in the
following century wrote of “the wealth of Ormuz.” To Albuquerque it
was but the first stone in the vast edifice of his projects, but to
his captains it was already more than enough. They wished to be making
prizes on the high seas, not to be bottled up in Ormuz building a fort
as if they were masons. Albuquerque, to whom in their complaints they
were very much like gnats in a thunderstorm, went on with his work,
tore up their first petition and placed a second under a jamb of one of
the fort’s doorways as it was being built. This was too much for the
vanity of his captains and several of them sailed away to India.

The result of this desertion was that Albuquerque was obliged
temporarily to abandon Ormuz. Small wonder that he wrote of their
conduct with extreme bitterness. “Without shame or fear of the
King or your Lordship,” he says in his letter to the Viceroy, Dom
Francisco de Almeida, “they deserted me in time of war, and during
actual hostilities with this city they left me and fled.... Portuguese
gentlemen have been guilty of no such vileness these three hundred
years, nor have I read of any such in the ancient chronicles.”

Even if they had all the right in the world on their side, these men
had deserted in the presence of the enemy; and had they been shot by
order of the Viceroy there and then, Portuguese rule would have been
greatly helped and strengthened and not only many troubles but many
lives spared in the future.

But no such salutary discipline prevailed in India; the instructions
given to the captains were partly independent, and the Viceroy
received them courteously and bade them draw up a document of their
complaints. When Albuquerque arrived in India his enemies took care
to foster differences between him and the Viceroy, who was opposed
to Albuquerque’s policy and methods, and, after being treated with
great discourtesy, Albuquerque was placed under arrest. One of the
accusations of his captains was that he wished to make himself King of
Ormuz.

They little knew their man. To expect Albuquerque, whose dreams of
conquest were as wide and magnificent as those of Alexander, to
vegetate as King of Ormuz was a mistake as colossal as to believe that
Napoleon could be content to rule Elba. There can be no doubt that
Albuquerque was unjustly treated by men incapable of understanding him,
all the more so in that Almeida’s term of office was up and by right
it was Albuquerque and not he who should have been governing India.
Albuquerque for his part disdained to be conciliatory.

Fortunately for Albuquerque and for India his imprisonment only lasted
a few weeks. The arrival of the Marshal, Fernando Coutinho, from
Portugal put a new face on the situation; he released Albuquerque and
installed him as Governor of India. Almeida set out for, but never
reached, Portugal.

The year 1509 was almost out, and it is 1510 which marks the beginning
of Albuquerque’s victories. With the Marshal he attacked Calicut,
but the Marshal’s impetuous rashness (he was so nettled by a first
success of the impetuous but wise Albuquerque that he said he would
take Calicut with no other arm than a stick in his hand) involved the
expedition in disaster, and, although they sacked Calicut, the Marshal
and many of the Portuguese lost their lives in a disorderly retreat
to the ships, Albuquerque himself receiving a wound which permanently
disabled his left arm.

The rest of the year was occupied with Goa.[14] He obtained possession
of this city after a mere show of resistance, but a large and
ever-growing army of Turks forced him to abandon it after being reduced
to great straits and danger. Albuquerque had had fresh trouble with his
captains, but on the arrival of a few ships from Portugal he returned
to Goa in the autumn and stormed it. Most of the Moors were put to
the sword in a massacre which lasted four days. Some Moorish women of
almost white complexion he married to Portuguese soldiers. This was
a deliberate policy, approved by the King of Portugal, in order to
provide a peaceful settled population.

The possession of Goa changed the whole position of the Portuguese
in India. Remote kings who had hitherto looked on the new-comers as
passing freebooters now sent ambassadors offering friendship and
treaties.

Barely six months after taking Goa, Albuquerque stormed and sacked
Malaca, in Malay, a city which now belongs to the British Empire and
has about 100,000 inhabitants, and which then, in Albuquerque’s own
words, was “_muito grande cousa_.”[15] Of all the great spoils the
Governor characteristically reserved for himself only two great bronze
lions which he intended to have placed on his tomb. But his ship, laden
with the costliest plunder, much of which was intended for King Manoel,
met with a violent storm and foundered. Albuquerque, dressed in a brown
coat and anything that came to hand, escaped on a raft.

In 1513 he carried out his long-cherished project of an attack on Aden,
whence, he said, “vermilion, currants, almonds, opium, horses, dates,
gold” went to India. The Portuguese assaulted but failed to take the
town--in their eagerness the ladders broke again and again under their
weight--and it was not safe to blockade it for fear of adverse winds,
lack of water, and the large and speedy assistance the enemy might
expect. Swift cameleers carried the news of the attack in fifteen days
to Cairo, and, generally, the presence of a large Portuguese fleet in
the Red Sea made a far-reaching impression.

Albuquerque set out to attack Aden again in 1515, but was occupied for
some time at Ormuz, and fell ill there. He started to return to India,
and on the way received tidings from a passing boat that his successor
to the Governorship of India had been appointed, and many important
posts given to his personal enemies.

This was his death-blow. Only a year before he had written to the King
of his determination to continue in India for the rest of his life,
at whatever sacrifice to himself, for the sake of maintaining and
strengthening the empire he had won. Now heartbroken he exclaimed, “Out
of favour with men for the sake of the King, and out of favour with the
King for the sake of men. It is good to make an end.” He dictated a
last brief letter to the King “in the throes of death,” recommending
his son, and died as the ship came in sight of Goa, straining his eyes
to see the tower of the church he had founded (December 1515).

Next day his body, dressed in the habit of Santiago, was carried ashore
and buried amid universal grief. The natives perhaps mourned him
sincerely, since he had worked for their prosperity and his attitude
towards them, as distinguished from the Moors, had always been kindly.
The gods, they said, had summoned him to war in heaven. His enemies
continued to fear him even dead, so that King João III declared that
India would be safe so long as Albuquerque’s body remained there, and
it was only in 1566 that his bones were brought to Portugal.

A contemporary Portuguese historian, Barros, thus describes
Albuquerque: “He was a man of medium height, of a cheerful, pleasant
countenance, but when angry he had a melancholy look; he wore his beard
very long during the time of his command in India, and as it was white
it made him very venerable. He was a man of many witty sayings and
in some slight annoyances [_menencorias leves!_ Had not Barros read
Albuquerque’s letters?] during his command he said many things the wit
of which delighted those whom they did not immediately affect. He spoke
and wrote very well with the help of a certain knowledge of Latin [the
superior Barros!]. He was cunning and sagacious in business, and knew
how to mould things to his purpose, and had a great store of anecdotes
suited to different times and persons. He was very rough and violent
when displeased and he tired men greatly by his orders, being of a very
urgent disposition. He was very charitable and devout, ever ready to
bury the dead. In action he was somewhat impetuous and harsh. He made
himself greatly feared by the Moors and always succeeded in getting the
better of them.”

Another historian, Correa, who had served Albuquerque three years
as private secretary in India, knew him better and appreciated his
greatness. It is Correa who gives us an imposing glimpse of the
Governor of India two years before his death, _i.e._ at the time when
Albuquerque described himself as “a weak old man.” He was dressed “in
doublet and flowing open robe, as was then the fashion, all of black
damask streaked with black velvet, on his head a net of black and
gold thread, and above this a large cap of black velvet; in his belt
a dagger of gold and precious stones worth fifteen thousand crusados,
round his neck a thick chain; and his long white beard, knotted at the
end, gave him a very venerable presence.”

Albuquerque was sincerely devout, even to the verge of mysticism or
superstition. He believed that St. James went before the Portuguese on
a white horse guiding them to victory, and when in the Red Sea that a
fiery cross in the sky was specially sent to beckon him on to further
conquests.

There is a massive strength in all that he said and did.[16] After
he had subdued Ormuz its king hesitated whether he should pay
his customary tribute to Persia and sent to consult Albuquerque.
Albuquerque made a little collection of firearms and cannon-balls and
answered, “In this coin is the King of Portugal wont to pay tribute.”

But the whole man is in his letters, aptly described as being “written
with a sword.” Perhaps it is only in the letters of Napoleon that one
finds the same mingling of great plans and conceptions with a mastery
of the smallest details and concern for things which a lesser man would
scorn to notice.

This Governor, the fear of whose name extended far into China, to
whom the Kings of Narsinga and Persia, Siam, Cambaya, Turkey, and
Cairo sent gifts, the conqueror of Ormuz and Cananor, Goa and Malaca,
who dispatched his agents even to the remote Moluccas, and who was
determined to destroy Mecca (five hundred Portuguese were to ride
swiftly inland from the coast, take it by surprise and burn it to
ashes) and thought of altering the course of the Nile, did not disdain
to occupy himself with the alphabets for teaching children to read, the
missals and pontificals for churches, pearl-fisheries, the horse trade,
the colour of the Red Sea, how to pack quicksilver, and a hundred
other matters of great diversity, while on the question of arms and
merchandise to be sent from Portugal to India[17] no modern official
report could exceed his letters in accuracy and minuteness.

For instance, he declares that lances are sent out unsharpened, as they
come from the Biscay factories, to the care of a _barbeiro inchado_ in
India, and in 1513 says that he now has workmen in Goa who can turn out
better guns than those of Germany. Unfortunately in Portugal India was
regarded merely as a mine to be exploited, not as a field that required
farming in order to continue productive. Albuquerque, when, as he says,
over his neck in work, had to answer great bundles of letters from the
King, often filled with carping criticisms of his actions or containing
contradictory projects. He complains that there is a new policy for
each year, almost in the words of Dante in the _Purgatorio_:

                  fai tanto sottili
  Provvedimenti ch’ a mezzo Novembre
  Non giunge quel que tu d’Ottobre fili.

It must be confessed that Albuquerque in these letters, filled with the
eloquence of the Old Testament, gave as good as he got: the pity is
that the King probably only saw them in the official summaries. “Sir,
the soldiers in India require to be paid their salaries,” he says on
one occasion, or “Your Highness is not well informed,” and he warns
him that should matters continue as in the past the empire will come
crumbling about the King’s ears.

Again he writes that he is not amazed that the accusations should be
made, but amazed that the King should believe them. The names of his
accusers were withheld, as later in trials before the Inquisition, but
he knew whence the trouble came and does not mince his words in telling
the King of the corruption, greed, carelessness, and incompetence of
the officials in India appointed by the King. “And if I were not afraid
of Your Highness I would send you a dozen of these mischief-makers in a
cage.”

In five days he writes nineteen letters to the King, some of them
of considerable length, this task occupying him till dawn, after a
long day’s work. On a single day he wrote the King eight letters, one
of which contains a splendid general account of the state of India,
another is a little masterpiece describing the misdeeds of one of his
captains.

No doubt his critics believed him to be harsh and insensible.
That this was far from being the case is shown by the fact that on
receiving, amid a shower of blame and criticisms, a sympathetic letter
from his old friend, the historian Duarte Galvão, he shed tears, and
also by the deep feeling he displayed when a whole batch of letters
came from the King full of dispraise. “Your Highness blames me, blames
me, blames me,” he wrote, and again, “My spirits fell to the ground and
my hair turned twice as white as it was before.”

When, therefore, a few months after he had written of his intention to
return from Ormuz to India in order to see the King’s letters and know
if he had sent ships and men for the expedition against Aden, he heard
that his successor was appointed, it is scarcely an exaggeration to say
that the news killed him.

Albuquerque’s crime was to have thought of India and Portugal first,
before personal interests and ambitions. “They call me a harsh man,”
he said; and “these officials of yours do not love me.” But if he
could vigorously show his dislike of the false and slovenly, he always
liberally rewarded good service, was loyal, generous, and unselfish,
and showed a most delightful pleasure in any thorough work or workman.
“The best thing I ever saw,” he says of a map; and of a good carpenter,
“he is a marvellous man.”[18]

No sooner was Albuquerque dead than his greatness was felt, and
posterity has never sought to deny it. If we consider the conditions
under which his great work was accomplished in six years--his ships
often so rotten that they sank of sheer old age, his men few and
ill-armed (before he received reinforcements in October 1512 he says
that the whole number of Europeans under his command in India were but
1,200, of whom barely 300 were properly armed), the fact that all his
projects were liable to be upset by orders dictated in ignorance at
home, and that as soon as his back was turned (for instance, when he
went to attack Aden) all the officials in India treated him as dead and
his instructions as a dead letter--we will not deny that posterity has
done well to honour and admire this man in his lonely magnificence.
_Fannomi onore e di ciò fanno bene._

No doubt he had great faults, since everything in him was great. He
adopted oriental methods in dealing with the kings of the East. He
murdered in cold blood the powerful minister of the young King of
Cochin, and in one of his letters to King Manoel he remarks calmly, “In
all my letters I bade him kill the Samuri of Calicut with poison.” But
he understood the East and was the only man who could have established
the Portuguese Empire firmly. That he was not given a free hand and
every assistance from the first was the doom of that empire, and
Portugal never saw his like again.


FOOTNOTES:

[12] Albuquerque’s father, Gonçalo de Albuquerque, was in favour at
Court. His grandfather João Gonçalvez had been secretary to King João I
and King Duarte, but was hanged for murdering his wife in 1437.

[13] In 1461 or 1462. In one of his letters (April 1, 1512) he says
that he is fifty. Correa, who calls him old in 1509, says that he
was over seventy at the time of his death. Despite the very definite
assertion in his letter, perhaps the last word has not been said as to
his age. Misprints in these matters are common. Couto, for instance,
says that Albuquerque’s nephew Naronha is nearly seventy in 1538 and
eighty in 1540. All the historians call Albuquerque old, yet the
captain of a fortress was considered too young for the post because he
was under forty (Correa III, 687). On the other hand not Borrow merely
but Couto (VI. 2. ix) calls Castro old, although he did not live to be
fifty. Perhaps in Albuquerque’s letter we should read LX instead of L
(for indeed why should he speak so fatherly to King Manoel (1469-1521)
if he was not considerably older than the King?), and _sesenta_ for
_setenta_ in Correa.

[14] Goa is thus described by an early traveller: “La città di Goa è
la più fresca delle Indie e la più abbondante di tutte le cose da....
È detta città molto grande, con buone case e grandi e belle strade
e piazze, murata d’intorno con le sue torri e fatta in una buona
fortezza. Fuori di detta città vi erano molti horti e giardini copiosi
e pieni d’infiniti arbori fruttiferi, con molti stagni di acque; eranvi
molte moschee e case d’ orationi di gentili. Il paese d’intorno è molto
fertile e ben lavorato.”

[15] The same traveller says: “Questa città di Malaca è la più ricca
scala di più ricchi mercatanti e di maggior navigatione e traffico che
si possa trovare nel mondo.”

[16] The story, maliciously recorded by Barros, that Albuquerque sent
ruby and diamond rings to the historian Ruy de Pina to jog his memory
in relating the events of India, may or may not be true. In a way it is
characteristic, for Albuquerque, if he wished for Pina’s praise, which
one may be inclined to doubt, was not a man to beat about the bush.
Perhaps after all it was more honest to plump down the rubies than to
indulge in _elogio mutuo_.

[17] In one letter he bids the King plant all the marsh-lands of
Portugal with poppies, since opium is the most welcome merchandise in
India.

[18] _Estimava muito os homens cavalleiros_, says Correa, who knew him
personally and insists more than once that he was very accessible. To
cope with what Albuquerque himself calls the “mountains of petitions”
that beset him he employed six or seven secretaries, but he dealt with
them unconventionally, signing them or tearing them up in the street as
they were given him, thereby expediting his business but offending the
vanity of the petitioners.


[Illustration: JOÃO DE CASTRO.]




VII

DOM JOÃO DE CASTRO

(1500-1548)

 Era tambem de sua pessoa tam esforçado como em letras insigne.--PEDRO
 DE MARIZ, _Dialogos de Varia Historia_.

 In that low shady quinta, embowered amongst those tall alcornoques,
 once dwelt John de Castro, the strange old Viceroy of India.--GEORGE
 BORROW, _The Bible in Spain_.


Castro was still a schoolboy when Albuquerque died. Born in 1500, the
son of D. Alvaro de Castro, in high office under Kings João II and
Manoel, and a daughter of the Count of Abrantes, he studied with the
famous mathematician, Pedro Nunez, and had a scientific as well as
a classical education. There is every reason to believe that he was
a promising and fervent scholar, but the victories of Dom Duarte de
Meneses in North Africa appealed to him even more than did the figures
of Euclid, and in 1518 he “took the key of the fields” and fled to
Tangier. There he served with the greatest distinction for nine years,
and stood high in favour with the Governor, Meneses, who knighted him
and on his return to Portugal in 1527 furnished him with a glowing
recommendation to the King.

Of the next few years of his life comparatively little is known. He
received a _comenda_ from the King, was employed on various service,
and married D. Leonor de Coutinho, of noble family but poor. Probably
he was able to devote considerable time to quiet study. In 1535 he
commanded one of the twenty-five Portuguese ships in the Emperor
Charles V’s victorious expedition against Tunis. It was on this
occasion that Castro’s lifelong friend, the gallant poet Prince Luis,
followed his example of 1518 and ran away to join the expedition
against the wishes of his brother King João III.[19]

In the autumn Castro was back in his favourite Cintra. There he himself
planted a _quinta_, to which his thoughts, later in India, constantly
turned. Those who go along the delightful shady road of orchard
and running streams, rock and woodland from Cintra to Monserrate
and Collares come in a few minutes to an archway and green door on
the right. It is here, in the _quinta_ now known as _Penha Verde_,
overlooking the fertile plain of Collares to the sea, that Castro, like
Pitt planting by moonlight or Garibaldi in his island, indulged his
love of husbandry.

“Here,” says one of his early biographers, “he entertained himself with
a new and strange kind of agriculture, for he cut down fruit-bearing
trees and planted wild woods, perhaps to show that he was so
disinterested that not even from the earth would he expect reward. Yet
it is no wonder if one who disdained the rubies and diamonds of the
East should think little of the products of Cintra’s rocks.” It was to
the _matos_ of the Serra de Cintra that he longed to return in 1546.
But he certainly did not despise the fruits of the soil, and probably
occupied himself with grafting experiments.

In the spring of 1538, as perhaps previously in the spring of 1537,
he sailed to India as captain of a ship. The fleet arrived at Goa
in September 1538 and went on to the relief of Diu. In March of the
following year he returned to Goa, and two years later accompanied the
new Governor, Dom Estevão da Gama, to the Red Sea.

On all these occasions Castro kept a log or _roteiro_, from Lisbon
to Goa, from Goa to Diu, and from Goa to the Red Sea. They display
a strong scientific interest, a spirit thoroughly modern--nothing,
however small it might be, was to him necessarily unimportant or
negligible--or perhaps ancient, since he complains that in his day the
scientific investigations of the ancients were no longer in vogue. The
logs are written with that vivid directness which mark his letters,
“written,” he said, “not for the ladies and gallants of the Court and
royal palaces, but for the mariners of Leça and Mattosinhos.”

His descriptions are precise and accurate, which does not prevent
them from being often picturesque. He notices many birds, including
one white and grey which, he says, the sailors call _frades_ (monks).
“I pay great attention to eclipses of the moon,” he writes, as also
to longitudes and latitudes, fishes, seaweeds, currents, winds, the
colour of the Red Sea, and every detail that might concern the art
of navigation, to the delight of his friends Dr. Pedro Nunez and
Prince Luis, who had furnished him with special instruments and other
assistance for his voyage.

In the summer of 1542 he was back at Cintra, but in December of that
year he was appointed to the command of the coast fleet, the main
duties of which were to keep clear the coast of Portugal from pirates,
such as Mondragon, who perpetually hovered in wait for the priceless
spoils and cargoes of Portuguese ships homeward bound from India. He
seems to have gone to sea before the end of the year and held this
post for two years, with a brief interval in 1543 when he commanded
the Portuguese fleet sent to co-operate with the Spanish against
Barbarossa. They did not come to an engagement, and Dom João, after
visiting Ceuta, returned to Portugal.

He was at Cintra in the beginning of 1545 when the unwelcome news
reached him that he had been appointed Governor of India. Most
unwillingly he accepted this new post, the difficulties and disquiet of
which he had been able to gauge at first hand during his former sojourn
in Goa. His young sons were to accompany him.

A picturesque story of the Governor-elect cannot be better told than
in the words of the historian Couto, who served under him in India:
“Passing one day by the door of a tailor [in Lisbon] he noticed a
pair of very rich and fashionable velvet breeches, and pulling up his
horse asked to see them. After examining their curious workmanship he
asked whose they were. The tailor, not knowing whom he was addressing,
answered that they were for a son of the Governor who was going to
India. Dom João de Castro thereupon in a rage took up a pair of
scissors and cut them into shreds. “Bid that young man buy arms,” he
said to the tailor, and so passed on.”

At the end of March the fleet sailed. The number of men actually
enlisted was eight hundred, but many more who had been rejected for
some defect or were escaping from justice succeeded in embarking as
stowaways. In the Governor’s ship alone there were nearly two hundred
of them, and they required to be fed during a voyage of many weeks. The
Governor was advised to cast them adrift in the provision ship or to
maroon them in the Cape Verde Islands, but humanely and persistently
refused.

He had not been long at Goa when, in April 1546, news was brought
that a formidable attack was being prepared against Diu, the fort
commanded by the heroic Dom João de Mascarenhas. Castro sent his son
Dom Alvaro with a strong fleet to its relief. The fleet was delayed by
violent storms, and when it finally reached Diu there was little of the
fortress left. The walls and bulwarks were levelled with the ground,
most of the defenders dead, and those who remained either wounded or
ill. No one but Mascarenhas could have held on in such conditions, and
even so “six more days,” wrote Castro to the King, “and relief would
have come too late.”

Most of the nobles in Diu were dead, and among them Dom João de
Castro’s other son, Fernando, who had been blown up with many others on
a mined part of the wall on which they had rashly remained, although
warned by Mascarenhas of their danger. “He should have obeyed Dom
João,” wrote Castro stoically to the King, and he added: “Of what Dom
Fernando did till the time of his death I will say nothing to your
Highness, for it cannot be that men are so wicked but that some among
them will inform your Highness of the services and great exertions that
my sons undergo in your service.”

The King of Cambaya still boasted of victory, and Dom João de Castro
himself sailed north with a powerful fleet from Goa. After striking
terror into the enemy by ravaging the coast of Cambaya, setting it all
aflame and, in his own words, “sparing no living thing,” he left these
shores covered with dead and crossed to Diu.

The fortress was now again invested by an army of 60,000 Moors, and
in the battle with the besieging force the Governor was himself more
than once in the greatest danger before the enemy was routed. Indeed,
it was his personal exertions which largely decided the day, and with
pardonable pride he wrote to the King that it was “the greatest victory
ever seen in all the East.”

He sent the King a long list of those who had conspicuously
distinguished themselves, and for himself he asked for the reward or
_alviçaras_ which it was customary to give to a general who had won
a battle or taken a city. “And because your Highness may give me one
unsuited to my nature and mode of life, I will ask for it specifically,
and it is that you should grant me a chestnut-grove which you have in
the Serra de Cintra, by the King’s Fountain, bordering on my _quinta_,
that my servants, having chestnuts to eat on my estate, may not go
plundering what does not belong to them. Its value may be ten or twelve
thousand réis, but to me it will be worth many thousands of crusados.”

There may be something a little theatrical and fantastic (contemporary
historians call him _bizarro_ and _fanfarrão_) in some of Castro’s
actions in India, in his Albuquerquian prowess on the coast of Cambaya,
the pawning of his beard (again in imitation of Albuquerque), his
triumphal entry into Goa, his preparation of stakes on which to spit
the Sultan as Pacheco had prepared one for the Samuri of Calicut; but
there can be no doubt of the sincerity of his desire to obtain this
Cintra _castanhal_.

After his victory he besought the King not to prolong his term of
office beyond the ordinary three years, and to allow him to return to
the Serra de Cintra, and in his will he says: “I have near Cintra a
_quinta_, called the Quinta of the King’s Fountain, which I made, and
to which I am greatly devoted because I made it and because it is in
a country where my father and ancestors were born,” while his letters
contain several pathetic references of the same kind.[20]

After his victory over the Moors, Dom João de Castro set about
rebuilding Diu, and to obtain money sent an appeal to the citizens of
Goa with some hairs of his beard in pawn,[21] since it was impossible
to send the bones of his son, as he had first intended, his death being
but recent. The citizens of Goa responded nobly to the appeal, and when
the Governor returned to Goa in the spring of 1547 received him with
great rejoicing. His barbaric “triumph” has been often described.

“He was richly Cloath’d, giving the season its due, and became them
as well and sprightly as his Arms. He had on a French suit of crimson
satin, with Gold twist about the Slashes and Seams, and, not to forget
he was a Souldier, he put on a Coat of Mail wrought on Cloth of Gold
with Buttons of Plate [_i.e._ silver].

“The Magistrates of the City received the Governour under a Canopy and
presently a Citizen of Quality, reverently bowing, took his Hat from
his Head, putting him on a Crown of Triumph and in his Hand a Palm.

“The ladies from their Windows sprinkled the Triumpher with distilled
Waters of diverse Spices.”[22]

In Portugal, too, the news of the victory before Diu was received
with universal exultation. The King raised Castro to the dignity
of Viceroy--the fourth Viceroy of India--granted him ten thousand
crusados, and gave his son Dom Alvaro the command of the Indian Sea.
But instead of allowing him to return he prolonged his term of office
for another four years. Castro was ill at the time, and shortly
afterwards this “saint and hero,” as the modern Portuguese historian
Oliveira Martins calls him, died at Goa in the arms of his friend St.
Francis Xavier (June 1548).

Thus Albuquerque, whose ties with Portugal had been gradually replaced
by those that bound him to Goa, which he had made, as Castro his
_quinta_, died with the bitter knowledge that, if he lived, he must
spend his years in Portugal, a whale among minnows, and watch his work
being undone by others; Castro, with his thoughts ever turning to the
rocks and woods of Cintra and the study of philosophy in his beloved
_quinta_, died in a foreign grandeur at Goa. He died in poverty, for,
ever disinterested and humane and generous towards others, he had spent
his money on the soldiers whom the State neglected to pay, and himself
remained penniless.

The last scene of his life in which he addressed the chief officials
and magistrates of Goa is almost as famous as the pawning of his beard.
“I am not asham’d, gentlemen, to tell you that the Vice Roy of India
wants in this sickness those Conveniences the meanest Souldier finds
in the Hospitals. I came to Serve not to Traffick in the East, I would
to your Selves have pawn’d the Bones of my Son and did pawn the Hairs
of my Beard to assure you I had no other Plate or Hangings in the
House to buy me a Hen, for in the Fleets I set forth the Souldiers fed
upon the Governour’s Salary before the King’s pay, and ’tis no wonder
for the Father of so many children to be poor. I request of you during
the time of this Sickness to order me out of the King’s Revenue a
proportionable maintenance and to appoint a Person of your own who may
provide me a moderate allowance.”[23]

It may be said that for the Governor of a great Empire to leave himself
without the means “to buy me a Hen” was the height of extravagance, but
that is only the cavil of a more mundane spirit, incapable of attaining
so heroic a sublimity, and his countrymen, at least, have always
been grateful to Castro for ostentatiously proving that amid all the
prevailing corruption there remained one honest man.

Like Albuquerque and Gama, he died in harness. But, great as Castro was
as a soldier, he would in all probability have been no less celebrated
for his services to literature had it been granted him to spend his
old age in the quiet of his shady _quinta_.

Couto ends his portrait of the Viceroy thus: “And for his great
charity, temperance, disinterestedness, exceeding love of God, and
other qualities of a good Christian, it may be affirmed that he will be
receiving in glory the prize and guerdon of all his trouble and toil.”
By his energy, vigour of thought and action, by his splendid character,
humane and resolute, he closed the most brilliant half-century of
Portugal’s history with a key of gold.


FOOTNOTES:

[19] The Emperor, who was the Prince’s cousin and brother-in-law,
welcomed him with open arms at Barcelona. On one occasion, when neither
would go through a door before the other and the Emperor insisted on
Prince Luis being the first to pass, the latter seized a torch from one
of the pages and so preceded him.

[20] In a letter to King João III from India he recalls all his
services since the age of eighteen and says: “For the love of God and
in reward for these services I beg your Highness to allow me to return
to Portugal to live with my wife and children and end the few troubled
days that remain to me in the Serra de Cintra,” and in 1540 he writes
to Prince Luis that only the arrival of a Turkish fleet in India will
prevent him from returning to Portugal.

[21] Then, as in the Middle Ages, the beard was considered an
honourable pledge, and men swore by it as Zeus might swear by the River
Styx. Albuquerque in India had given some hairs of his beard to a
soldier and afterwards redeemed them by a payment of money.

[22] From Sir Peter Wyche’s picturesque seventeenth-century translation
of Jacinto Freire de Andrada’s _Life of Dom João de Castro_.

[23] Wyche’s version.


_Printed by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury._




Transcriber’s Notes

A few minor errors in punctuation have been corrected.

The spelling of “King Diniz” changed to “King Dinis” in a few spots
throughout the text.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PORTUGUESE PORTRAITS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
</doc>
